

## Introduction

### SCIENCE AND YOUR EVERYDAY LIFE

A highly contagious and potentially fatal virus spreads through respiratory droplets but is easily preventable through a simple vaccination. Sound familiar? Since you’ve gone through a pandemic—one of the events in your lifetime that will make history—we know what you’re thinking: Covid‐19!

But no, the virus we’re talking about is canine distemper. This is one of the most serious diseases a dog can get. It can also affect foxes, pandas, skunks, and raccoons. Like rabies, distemper is nothing you or your furry friend want to mess with. It can lead to some gnarly symptoms, including dehydration, vomiting, difficult breathing, and odd fits of snapping or chomping. As the condition worsens, infected dogs can suffer grand mal seizures followed by death.

Dog owners find the idea of canine distemper distressing. Most want effective prevention and treatment for their pets and, if they hear of canine distemper, follow expert veterinary advice. What’s tragically ironic is that some of the same dog owners who do not hesitate to vaccinate their puppies against distemper are skeptical towards vaccines for humans, discounting the advice of medical experts.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is widespread worldwide; it is one of the world’s most frequently sexually transmitted diseases. Among other effects, HPV substantially increases the risk of various forms of cancer. Thankfully, there’s a vaccine for HPV. The vaccine first became available in 2006, after thorough testing for safety and efficacy. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends HPV vaccines as part of routine vaccinations in all countries. And yet, the global HPV vaccination rate in 2018 was estimated to be only 12.2%. This low rate is a combination of limited availability and affordability in low‐ to middle‐income nations and parents’ resistance to their children receiving the HPV vaccine, especially in high‐income nations.

At some point in their lives, most people will need to decide about whether to be vaccinated for some disease, whether to have their children undergo routine vaccinations, and even whether to have their dog vaccinated. And, when it comes to vaccines for humans, sometimes vaccine skeptics have louder voices than doctors and other experts. So, it can be difficult to get a clear understanding of vaccines’ safety, effectiveness, and necessity for public health. What can help is a sound understanding of the medical research about vaccines and a deeper understanding of what makes this and other scientific research trustworthy.

All vaccines approved for use in humans or animals have undergone thorough testing for safety and efficacy. Most vaccines do have potential side effects, such as achiness for a day or two, but serious side effects for any approved vaccine are very rare. And vaccine skeptics’ claims about substantive risks of vaccinations have been thoroughly debunked.

But you don’t need to just take our word for it, or the word of any individual scientist. Science’s credibility and its trustworthiness as a source of knowledge result from its methods and reasoning processes and how these are carried out by scientists and endorsed by scientific institutions. This is what makes established scientific knowledge trustworthy. Learning more about these methods and reasoning processes can give you a sense for why scientific research results in trustworthy knowledge, and it can also prepare you to evaluate specific reports of scientific research findings.

Understanding how science works is important because scientific findings, and the public’s reactions to them, dramatically shape our world. Science regularly influences your life, whether you are looking for it to or not. Consider the Covid-19 pandemic, the internet and the rise of AI, and climate change policy. The ability to understand and assess scientific reasoning enables you to make educated decisions related to your health, medical care, lifestyle, and more. It also enables you to critically evaluate reports of scientific findings and the credentials of experts in order to decide not just what to believe, but—more importantly—why.

Someone with a sophisticated understanding of science is also well positioned to make judgments about science more globally. Is the level of public funding for  scientific research sufficient? Should we worry if private corporations fund science? Are there important topics that aren’t yet adequately targeted in scientific research? Answers to these questions require thinking about the status of the scientific enterprise as a whole, how it should relate to society, and whether and how funding sources matter.



Scientists are, of course, the main practitioners of science. Other researchers have as their primary focus understanding what science—and scientists—are up to. These researchers investigate what science is and how it works, its challenges and limitations, and its relationship with society. These topics are what this book is all about. Several disciplines investigate science in this way; primary among these are history, sociology, and philosophy. Historians of science research how science has changed over time. Sociologists research social and cultural influences on science. This book draws from the history and sociology of science, but its main approach is philosophical. This is because we, its authors, are philosophers of science.

If you haven’t studied philosophy of science, it may sound obscure. But philosophy of science is just the investigation of science, focused especially on questions of what science should be like in order to be a trustworthy route to knowledge and to achieve the other ends we want it to have, such as usefulness to society. This book is written from a philosophical perspective, but it does not dwell on philosophers’ different theories and debates about science. Instead, we aim to combine insights about science from philosophy with concrete examples to illuminate science’s aims, methods, and patterns of reasoning, without getting bogged down in controversies, technical terminology, or too many details.

The title of this book, *Recipes for Science*, is meant to evoke two ideas. First, culinary recipes have many variations: in what dish they are used to create, which version of the dish, and details of implementation. Different recipes are used to make bread and lasagna, bread recipes may call for leavening with yeast or baking soda, and ingredient measurements may be in weight or volume. Science is also like this. Scientific research can have many different aims and proceed using a variety of different methods.

On the other hand, any culinary recipe employs intentional combinations of ingredients using time-tested methods to lead to a specific outcome. And different recipes for one type of food tend to have some elements in common, even if many of their features vary. So, for example, breads usually incorporate grain of some kind as a major ingredient, most use a leavening agent, and they are cooked—usually but not always by baking in the oven. There are resemblances among different breads and the recipes used to make them, even if there’s no simple definition of bread and no one recipe required to make bread. Science is like this as well. Even as it proceeds in different ways, and even as there’s no one overarching set of instructions or mechanical procedures that guarantees good science, there are certain generalizations that can be made about how good science is conducted.



 

Recipes for bread have many variations, but both the recipes and the resulting breads tend to have some features in common with one another. Scientific methods are like this: endless variation but with themes in both methods and results.

This book aims to facilitate a clear understanding of the main elements of science, and the importance of those elements, even as it illustrates the tremendous variety of projects that count as science.

The first part of the book, Chapters 1 – 5, addresses the nature of science and its key methods.

Chapter 1 surveys what is distinctive about science’s aims, methods, and institutional structure and suggests those features as a checklist for distinguishing science from non-science and fake science.

Chapter 2 introduces how science is shaped by values, varies in its aims, and consists in a variety of recipes with a few commonalities.

Chapter 3 examines the nature of scientific experiments and the roles experimentation plays in science.

Chapter 4 catalogues varieties of non-experimental studies and discuss their advantages and disadvantages.

Chapter 5 focuses on scientific models: how they are constructed and used, and the main varieties in which they come.

The second part of the book, Chapters 6 – 10, focuses on important patterns of reasoning in science.

Chapter 6 Examines patterns of deductive reasoning and their use in scientific hypothesis-testing.

Chapter 7 Addresses the importance of and challenges with inductive reasoning and the scientific significance of abductive reasoning, also known as inference to the best explanation.

Chapter 8 Introduces basic concepts and interpretations of probabilistic reasoning.

Chapter 9 Surveys graphical and numerical representation using descriptive statistics and misuses of statistical reasoning, while

Chapter 10 Discusses how inferential statistics is used in estimation and hypothesis-testing.

The final part of the book, Chapters 11 – 13, addresses the ultimate aims of science and its relationship to society.

Chapter 11 Addresses how scientific methods are used to acquire causal knowledge.

Chapter 12 Examines how scientific findings yield theoretical knowledge and understanding of the world and discusses change in scientific theories and how science makes progress.

Chapter 13 Discusses the complicated relationship science bears to society, analyzes how values influence science, and surveys the changes and challenges facing science in the 21st century.

### INTENDED AUDIENCES AND HOW TO USE THE BOOK

This book is not just for students of philosophy or science majors. Indeed, the primary audience we had in mind in developing this book is an undergraduate student in a general education course, who may not take any additional science courses in college. We asked ourselves, what would that student most benefit from knowing about how science works? What episodes from historical and current science would that student be interested to read about and contemplate?

We expect this book will also be useful for some more specialized or more advanced courses. These include science education courses, especially those that focus on the nature of science and scientific reasoning; introductory philosophy of science courses, especially if supplemented with primary readings that address some of the major philosophical controversies about science; and introductory science courses, especially methods courses, when supplemented with material specific to the particular scientific field of study.

This textbook was designed to be usable in its entirety in a standard semester, with approximately one chapter covered per week. But, to be useful in a wide range of course levels and disciplines and for different teaching goals, we have also designed the book to be modular: each chapter can be used independently from the others. Instructors (or independent readers) can thus choose to use only the chapters that suit their needs. Each section may rely on earlier sections in the same chapter, but not later sections in the same chapter or other chapters. Instructors may choose not to assign later sections in some chapters that seem overly specialized or too difficult for their teaching needs.

Scientific integrity requires the proper acknowledgement of the sources of ideas or words researchers use from someone else. There are standard citation practices for ideas and words from published material such as articles, books, and encyclopedia entries. But even using a tool like a large language model (LLM) for generating and editing text should be transparently acknowledged in a paper. When you directly use others’ words, that should be indicated with quotation marks and precise citation, including page number where available. A similar point applies to paraphrases. In this textbook, we have compiled our sources for each chapter in a bibliography at the back of the book. Failing to cite one’s sources in academic writing or using parts of a text written by someone else or the ideas of others—whether intentional or not—is plagiarism. But scientific integrity not only requires proper acknowledgement of sources; it also requires relying on the best available sources. Sources must be credible, up-to-date, and pertinent. There’s no general standard for where to find high-quality sources. Depending on the purpose of a piece of writing, peer-reviewed academic research articles and books may be the only acceptable sources, while, in other instances, popular content from newspapers and magazines might also be fine. Internet sources might be okay too, but because anyone can publish a blog or pontificate on social media, it’s essential to carefully evaluate the credibility, reputation, and timeliness of a source on the internet and whether it comes from a genuine expert on the topic.

Each section within every chapter ends with a list of exercises to solidify understanding and challenge students to apply what they have learned. We encourage instructors to make use of these exercises for in-class group or individual activities, homework, or exam questions. Exercises are divided into three categories: Recall exercises can be completed just by consulting the section. Think exercises provide opportunities to consider implications of or questions about ideas from the section. In Apply exercises, students are asked to apply ideas from the section to new examples or circumstances.

A list of further readings at the end of each chapter provides inroads into more in-depth investigations of individual topics covered. At the end of the book, there is a glossary of technical terms and other specialized vocabulary that students can consult as needed. Terms defined in the glossary are indicated in the main text with bold and italics when they are first defined, as philosophy of science was earlier in this introduction.

Finally, there is a website to accompany the textbook. The website includes example syllabi for different kinds of courses utilizing this text, additional exercises, an answer key for some exercises, some image files related to the text, and links to content that will enrich students’ experience with the topics covered in this book. The website also includes a series of brief videos, each engaging with one of the core topics in this book.



#### EXERCISES

0.1 Recall: List three ways in which science is relevant to your life (and others’ lives). Watch Video 1

0.2 Think: What do you expect to learn from this textbook and the course you’re reading it for?

0.3 Think: What most concerns you about this textbook and the course you’re reading it for?

0.4 Think: What do you think is most valuable about learning about science and scientific reasoning? Give reasons to support your response.

0.5 Apply: Describe your relationship to science. For example, have you taken many courses in science or read about science on your own? If so, on what topics, and did you enjoy the experience? Do you know any scientists? Do you think there are reasons to distrust or dislike science? If so, what are the reasons?

### FURTHER READINGS

For an overview of immunization and vaccination, see World Health Organization. Vaccines and immunization. www.who.int/health‐topics/vaccines‐and‐immunization

For a concise overview of how vaccination has contributed to global health, see Greenwood, B. (2014). The contribution of vaccination to global health: Past, present and future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369 (1645), 20130433.

A general reference on topics in philosophy, including philosophy of science, is the Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu