## CHAPTER 7 Inductive and abductive reasoning

### 7.1 THE FLINT WATER CRISIS AND AMPLIATIVE INFERENCE

​	After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Describe inferences involved in uncovering the Flint water crisis
- Give examples of ampliative inference in science and everyday life
- List three features of inductive and abductive inferences

#### The water crisis in Flint, Michigan

Before 2014, Flint, an industrial city in the US state of Michigan, had received its water supply from neighboring Detroit. In April 2014, major budget deficits led city leadership to change the city’s water supplier. The new supplier would provide water from the Flint River. The Flint River flowed directly through town, so it was a convenient source of water, but it had also long been polluted with industrial waste, sewage, and agricultural runoff. Immediately after the change, residents began to complain of discolored water with a foul odor and taste.

Clean drinking water is a basic human necessity, to which many people across the globe lack access. In Flint, the problem had several components. The Flint River had been badly polluted for decades, and the environmental cleanup of its contaminants and toxic waste had not been properly performed. The water previously supplied from Detroit was treated so that it wouldn’t leach lead from lead supply lines, but the new water source from the Flint River wasn’t treated. Further, city officials did not conduct testing as required by the US Environmental Protection Agency. And even though the problem was immediately noticeable to residents, officials ignored their concerns and repeatedly declared that the water was safe.

This led to a serious public health crisis. In the summer of 2014, there were outbreaks of E. coli bacteria and Legionnaires’ disease, both caused by fecal contamination. Residents were instructed to boil water before drinking it, and water treatment changes were made. But the treatment wasn’t conducted properly, leading to levels of chlorine byproducts that violated the Safe Drinking Water Act and resulted in high concentrations of carcinogenic trihalomethanes. But this wasn’t the worst of it.

Officials ignored federal environmental regulations that required treatment of the water supply system with anticorrosive chemicals. The polluted water from the Flint River was highly corrosive; because it had not been treated, the corrosive water leached lead from lead supply lines into the water supply. Lead is extremely toxic and can have massively adverse health effects in everyone and especially in children. Lead concentrations in children’s blood as low as five parts per billion (ppb) can result in decreased intelligence and behavioral and learning deficits.

Flint resident LeeAnne Walters’ family and neighbors were suffering from rashes and extreme weakness, and her own hair was falling out. She and other frustrated community members carried jugs of brown tap water to community meetings. City officials continued to claim that the water was safe. In 2015, she had her water supply tested, and it was found to have high levels of lead. She then contacted Marc Edwards, an environmental engineer at Virginia Tech, who worked with his students to supply hundreds of testing kits to Flint residents and guidance for using them. Ultimately, 268 homes were tested, and the findings revealed that water from 85% of the homes contained lead levels over the minimum level to be reported; 17% exceeded the legal limit of 15 ppb, and 10% of the homes had water above 26.8 ppb. (Lead levels over 5 ppb is problematic, and 15 ppb is the legal limit for water.)

Another important scientific contribution was made by Mona Hanna-Attisha, a local pediatrician in Flint. Hanna-Attisha evaluated community health records and found that the percentage of young children tested to have elevated levels of lead in their blood had more than doubled in Flint since the changed water source. These different lines of research spurred by local community activists produced telling evidence that Flint’s water supply was poisonous.

Once the environmental emergency was finally acknowledged, scientific research was also part of eventual remediation. One of the problems with testing was that Flint did not have reliable records of where lead service lines were located. In 2016, a group of computer scientists at the University of Michigan developed a machine learning model to predict the homes most likely to have lead pipes and thus in need of service line replacement. The model succeeded in 70% of its predictions, meaningfully improving lead pipe replacement efforts.

The Flint water crisis raises interesting and difficult issues about the relationship of science to the public good, the involvement of community members in scientific research, and the role of scientific trust and communication in designing effective public policy. We’ll return to some of those topics later in this chapter and later in the book. For now, we want to draw your attention to the form of the inferences involved in determining the problem, and the extent of the problem, with Flint’s water.

The aim of the water-testing research was to learn about the water quality across all houses in Flint, and the path to gaining that knowledge began with testing water quality in one family’s house. The 268 homes eventually sampled is a large sample, but it’s not enough for deductive reasoning. A deductive inference about the water quality in all houses in Flint would have required testing each one, but that wouldn’t have been the best way to proceed during a public health emergency. Similarly, the pediatrician who raised alarm about increased lead exposure in children drew broader conclusions about more than just the children that had been sampled. Like much of scientific reasoning, the scientists investigating Flint’s water instead used inductive reasoning to draw conclusions that went beyond the data they had collected.

#### Inductive and abductive inferences

It’s sometimes said that the conclusions of deductive arguments are already contained in their premises. This saying means that the conclusions don’t add any new content beyond what the premises provide, since the premises guarantee the conclusions—the requirement for any valid deductive argument. Most instances of everyday and scientific reasoning are not like this. Few scientific conclusions follow necessarily, or with any kind of logical certainty, from a set of premises.

In other words, much of human reasoning is nondeductive. Rather than beginning from general statements with universal scope or axiomatic first principles, scientists and nonscientists alike typically begin from incomplete information or data collected piecemeal. They draw tentative conclusions that may turn out to be false even when their premises are true. The community activists and scientists investigating Flint’s water crisis proceeded nondeductively. Their conclusions went beyond what was guaranteed by water sampling results, the specific children who had been tested for lead exposure, and the houses known to have lead service lines.

**Inductive inference** is an inferential relationship from premises to conclusion that is one of probability rather than necessity.

**Abductive inference** is another type of nondeductive inference, is an inferential relationship that attributes special status to explanatory considerations. Abductive inference is also called “inference to the best explanation.” Inductive and abductive inferences have three characteristics that distinguish them from deductive inferences: they are ampliative, non-monotonic, and have varying strengths.

First, inductive and abductive inferences are ampliative. An ampliative inference is an inference in which the conclusion expresses content that, in some sense, goes beyond what is present in the premises. The conclusion contains information that augments or amplifies the content of the premises. The conclusion that Flint’s water supply was toxic went beyond the evidence provided by a limited number of samples from houses in Flint. Ampliative inferences are valuable insofar as they enable us to extend beyond what we already know. A downside is that the conclusions of ampliative inferences are not necessitated by the premises, and so they are not guaranteed to be true.

Second, inductive and abductive inferences are non-monotonic. Recall from Chapter 6 that a monotonic inference cannot be invalidated by the addition of new information. For non-monotonic inferences, then, new information may change whether or not the premises support the conclusion. Adding new premises to the existing premises of a non-monotonic inference with a true conclusion can render that conclusion false. For example, if the machine learning model predicted a group of houses in Flint had lead pipes, but then we learned that the model had recently fallen to only 20% accuracy, we would not have confidence in this prediction. One of the hallmarks of science is openness to criticism and to new evidence. Scientists can face surprising findings that lead them to abandon or update their ideas. This feature is well captured by the non‐monotonic feature of inductive and abductive inferences. The addition of new information can reveal how a good inference from true premises may nevertheless be wrong. 

Third, inductive and abductive inferences vary in strength, or in degree of evidential support. The strength of an inductive inference (or abductive inference) is the probability that the conclusion is true assuming that all the premises are true. The conclusion that all of Flint’s water is toxic was strengthened when scientists sampled water from nearly 300 different homes, as compared to earlier inferences based only on problematic water samples from a single home. Deductive arguments are either valid or not, but strength comes in degrees: two arguments might both be strong, but one might be stronger than the other. Further, any inductive or abductive argument, no matter how strong, can be additionally strengthened. Sampling water from more houses or testing more children for elevated lead levels can make the respective arguments these sources of evidence relate to stronger.

##### EXERCISES

7.1 Recall: Summarize three uses of scientific investigation to help diagnose and resolve the Flint water crisis, and describe how each involved inductive inference.

7.2 Apply: One home in Flint had tap water tested to have lead levels of 217 ppb. How high is that amount of lead, compared to metrics discussed in this section? How serious is the problem (assuming people are drinking the tap water)?

7.3 Think: Why didn’t scientists test water from even more homes in Flint? Wouldn’t testing water from more homes provide more conclusive evidence?

7.4 Think: Consider decisions you’ve made in the last 24 hours, and describe two ampliative inferences you made in order to make one or more of those decisions.

7.5 Recall: List three features of inductive and abductive inferences described in this section, and give an example of each from the Flint water crisis.

7.6 Apply: Give an example of an inductive or abductive inference. Then, show how the inference is ampliative, non-monotonic, and can be made stronger or weaker.

### 7.2 INDUCTIVE INFERENCE

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Define inductive inference and assess the strength of an inductive argument
- Distinguish between inductive generalization and inductive projection
- Describe the problem of induction and articulate what makes it a hard problem to solve

#### Strength of inductive inference

Imagine you go to the grocery store, hankering for some apples. The grocer takes one apple from the top of one box, cuts it open, and offers you a slice to taste. It tastes good! What you may not notice is that the grocer is tacitly expecting you to make the following inference:

(1) One apple from this box is good.

∴ (2) All apples from this box are good.

You draw three other apples from the box at random. The three apples look good, like the one the grocer had you taste. So, you buy that box of a dozen apples. What’s the inference you are tacitly making?

(1) One apple from this box is good.

(2) Three apples picked at random from this box look like the apple that is good.

∴ (3) All apples from this box are good.

Neither of these is a valid deductive inference: the truth of the premises do not guarantee the truth of the conclusions. At best, the premises make the conclusions likely or probable. Accordingly, both inferences are inductive. Recall from section 7.1 that an inductive inference is an inferential relationship from premises to conclusion that is one of probability rather than necessity. Even if the premises in each inference are true, the conclusion may nonetheless be false. Perhaps not all apples from the box are good, even if the apple the grocer let you taste was good and even if you checked three other randomly picked apples to ensure they looked good. For all you know, the rest of the apples in the box could be rotten.

Because the truth of the premises in inductive arguments does not guarantee the truth of the conclusion, inductive arguments are always logically invalid. Instead of logical validity, the benchmark for a good inductive inference is its strength, which is the probability that the conclusion is true assuming that all the premises are true. And, just as we assess whether the premises are true to judge deductive arguments for soundness, we should assess whether the premises of an inductive argument are true.

In our grocery store example, you saw the grocer take an apple from the box and cut it open on the spot. The premise that one apple from the box is good is certainly true. But the inductive inference the grocer wants you to make about the entire box of apples isn’t very strong. After all, the grocer chose the apple he cut open, and you haven’t seen any other apples in the box. Your selection of three other apples to visually examine and finding that they look just like the apple the grocer invited you to taste increases the strength of the tacit inference, and now you are satisfied that all the apples in the box are (probably) good. You’re sure enough of this, at least, that you are willing to buy the box of apples.

In Chapter 6, we discussed how the hypothetico-deductive (H-D) account of hypothesis-testing contrasts the deductive validity of refutation with nondeductive confirmation.

The present discussion of inductive inference can shed additional light on the logic of confirming hypotheses. The H‐D account makes clear that confirmation does not involve valid deductive inference. What it does involve is inductive inference. And, as we now know, inductive arguments can be judged for their strength. So, the confirmation of a hypothesis—reasoning from some observation(s) to the conclusion that a hypothesis is true—can be judged according to the inductive strength of the inference. Indeed, we will see in later chapters that scientists often employ statistical tools based on the mathematics of probability to guide their judgments of the confirmation of a hypothesis.

So, inductive inferences are better, more trustworthy, when they are stronger. Yet even very strong inductive inferences with true premises may nonetheless have false conclusions. Again, unlike deductive inference, inductive inference offers no guarantees. Until the 17th century, Europeans believed that all swans were white. Their belief was supported by strong evidence: all of the swans they’d ever seen were white, and there were swans in many parts of Europe. Further, no one they consulted had ever mentioned seeing a swan that wasn’t white. Nonetheless, in 1697, the Dutch explorer Willem de Vlamingh returned to Europe with two black swans he had captured on Australia’s Swan River. The strong inductive argument in favor of all swans being white was undermined by this development, and the conclusion was shown to be false.

Here’s another example of a strong inductive argument that turned out to be false. The smallpox (variola) virus was completely eradicated in 1979. This does not mean that the viral particles no longer exist, however. The World Health Organization (WHO) oversees two vaults containing variola specimens: one at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia (USA) and the other at the State Research Centre of Virology and Biotechnology in Novosibirsk, Russia. Given the complete eradication of smallpox and the international oversight of WHO, it was reasonable to infer that these were the only remaining variola specimens. But, in 2014, scientists stumbled upon some 60‐year‐old unsecured vials of smallpox while cleaning out a storage closet at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, in the US. This discovery undermined the reasonable inductive inference from the eradication of smallpox and WHO’s strict control of remaining specimens to the conclusion that smallpox did not exist anywhere else. This was a strong inductive argument, at least until new evidence came to light that directly undermined its conclusion. Notice that the premises of the argument remain true; this example shows how inductive inferences are non‐monotonic, as discussed in section 7.1.

#### Two forms of inductive inference

There are two common forms of inductive inference: generalizations and projections.

**Inductive generalization** An inductive generalization is an inference to a general conclusion about a class of objects based on the observation of some number of objects in that class. If the conclusion applies to all members of the class, the generalization is a universal inductive generalization. The form of inductive generalizations is something like this:

Inductive generalization
(1)  Objects O1, O2, O3, . . . , and On each has property P.
∴    (2)  All Os have property P.

The inference you made in the grocery store example was like this. You reasoned from the premise that one apple from the box is good and the premise that three other apples drawn randomly from the box also seem to be good to the conclusion that all apples in the box are good.

Inductive generalization is the kind of inference involved in making claims about an entire population based on claims about a sample. This is commonly involved in drawing conclusions from field experiments and studies. For example, in the natural experiment described in Chapter 4 investigating how women village council leaders in India affected social services, the conclusions drawn regarded not just the women who had been studied but the prospect of social service changes from women village leaders across India, and perhaps even beyond India. Drawing those conclusions involves an inductive generalization from the village leaders studied to a broader class of women in municipal leadership positions. The concept of external experimental validity introduced in Chapter 3—the extent to which experimental results generalize to other conditions—bears on this use of inductive generalization. (Note that this use of “validity” means something entirely different from validity in deductive inference.)

**Inductive projection** A second form of inductive inference is inductive projection: an inference to a conclusion about the features of some object that has not been observed based on observations of similar objects. The form of inductive projections is like this:

Inductive projection
(1)  O1, O2, O3, . . . , and On each have been observed to have property P.

∴    (2)  The next object Ok has property P.

For example, imagine you return to the same grocery store after working your way through that box of apples. All of the apples were, in fact, delicious. The same grocer is working. This time, you don’t bother tasting or visually inspecting apples, you just ask the grocer to give you a box of delicious apples. Even if you don’t explicitly think it through, your inference is something like:

(1) Last time, the box of apples I bought here on the grocer’s recommendation was delicious.

∴ (2) This time, the box of apples I buy will be delicious as well.

In this case, you aren’t finding out about some members of a group to generalize to the whole group. Instead, you are using your knowledge of about one kind of object to draw conclusions about something similar. You don’t need to try to generalize that all boxes of apples sold in this store will be delicious. All you are interested in is making a prediction—a projection—of whether the next box of apples you buy here will be delicious.

Inductive projection can also be involved in drawing inferences from experiments and studies. This is especially relevant when the experimental subjects or the conditions in which the experiment is conducted are somewhat unlike the conditions and subjects about which scientists want to draw conclusions. In Chapter 3, we saw how Newton discovered that a rainbow spectrum of light created by a prism could be restored to white light by traveling through a second prism. Newton inferred from this that all light—even light that had never been separated into a spectrum of colors—was composed of multiple colors of light. This was an inductive projection from the light studied in laboratory conditions to natural light out in the world. Drawing conclusions about a target system from a model can also involve inductive projection. In that case, the model having some attribute is used as a basis for inferring that the target system, similar in certain respects, will have a similar attribute. Efforts to calibrate the model and establish its similarities to the target system are ways to increase the strength of these inductive projections.

#### The problem of induction

Why do you look to the east if you want to see the morning sunrise? Why do physicians continue to prescribe acetaminophen (such as Tylenol) to reduce fevers? Why do I trust that tap water I drink is not contaminated? At first glance, the answers to these questions might seem obvious. That’s where the Sun rises above the horizon every morning. Acetaminophen is usually the best approach to reducing fevers. And, throughout my life, in different homes and possibly different towns, I’ve had access to clean water from the tap.

Notice, though, that all three of these conclusions rest on inductive inferences. They are very strong inductive inferences, but we have seen that even strong inductive inferences from true premises can have false conclusions. It’s worth asking: why think inductive reasoning in general is trustworthy?

Inductive inference is essential to our reasoning, and it seems to work very well. Inductive reasoning has led us to buy good apples and other foods based on samples, to look for the sunrise in approximately the right place, to take medication as needed, to know when water is safe to drink, and to wear a coat when we leave the house in the winter. Occasionally, we’re led astray; there was that whole matter of Europeans spending centuries thinking all swans are white. But, overall, inductive reasoning has a track record of success.

That is an argument for why we can trust inductive reasoning. Do you notice anything about the form of the argument? Is it deductively valid or inductively strong?

Because our argument in favor of the trustworthiness of inductive reasoning is inductive, we can add even more premises about times when inductive inference led to true conclusions. This would make our argument that inductive reasoning is trustworthy even stronger. But there’s a fundamental problem. The argument relies on inductive inference: because inductive reasoning has guided us so well up until now, we conclude that it will continue to do so. So, this just prompts the same question: what justifies the inductive inference that inductive reasoning is trustworthy?

The problem of induction is the concern that inductive reasoning cannot be logically justified, since any possible justification would need to employ inductive inference and would thus be circular. This problem was set out in the 18th century by the Scottish philosopher David Hume, who argued that the problem of induction cannot be solved. The argument goes as follows. Consider how we might justify inductive reasoning. There are two possibilities: either use deductive inference or use nondeductive inference.

First consider the possibility of using deductive inference to justify inductive reasoning. Valid deductive inference generates conclusions that cannot be false if all premises are true. Because strong inductive inference with true premises may still have a false conclusion, these inferences would be invalid if construed deductively. So, inductive reasoning cannot be justified using deductive reasoning.

Now consider the possibility of using nondeductive inference to justify inductive reasoning. To justify inductive reasoning nondeductively, we would need to show that inductive reasoning is generally reliable. But, as we just talked through, this can only be done using inductive inference. So, looking to a nondeductive justification for inductive inference leads to circular reasoning: we would need to prove inductive inference is reliable in order to justify inductive reasoning. In other words, we would have to assume the reliability of the method whose reliability we need to establish. Consequently, inductive inferences cannot be justified by reasoning nondeductively, either.

Given that deductive and nondeductive reasoning exhaust the possibilities, Hume concluded that inductive reasoning cannot be rationally justified. Notice that this is a deductive argument against the possibility of providing logical justification for inductive reasoning. The argument we tried to provide in favor of inductive reasoning was, of course, itself only inductive (hence the circularity).

Hume also noted that the circular justification of induction depends on what he called the uniformity of nature assumption. This is the idea that the natural world is sufficiently uniform, or unchanging, that we are justified in thinking our future experiences will resemble our past experiences. The uniformity of nature is an auxiliary assumption needed for the inductive inference in favor of inductive reasoning to succeed.

The uniformity of nature assumption cannot itself be justified, though, since this assumption is merely based in inductive inferences from our past experience. We think that nature is uniform because, so far, it has been. But what do we know about tomorrow?

Philosophers of science have proposed several solutions to the problem of induction. One potential solution begins from the observation that inductive inferences are intended to warrant probable conclusions—not make guarantees. And there are rational grounds for inferring conclusions about the probability of something being the case based on empirical evidence. Perhaps tools of statistical reasoning, which we focus on in later chapters, can justify some varieties of inductive inference. And statistical reasoning does have a rational basis, provided by probability theory (a deductively valid axiomatic theory, as we’ll see in Chapter 8).

A different approach to solving the problem of induction is simply to show that inductive inference is the best we can reasonably hope for when it comes to making reliable predictions. Either nature is uniform or it’s not. If nature is uniform and we want to make reliable predictions, then a noninductive method like, say, fortune-telling may or may not work. In contrast, inductive inference will clearly work. (Remember the uniformity of nature assumption.) So, if nature is uniform, inductive inference is more reliable than noninductive methods. Now suppose nature is not uniform. In that case, inductive inference will be unreliable, but so will any alternative methods. Why? Well, suppose that fortune-telling was better than induction, such that fortune-tellers were able to reliably predict the future. This success would imply some kind of uniformity. But any uniformity in nature can be used for inductive inference. You could, for example, inductively reason to the future success of fortune-tellers from their past successes. Consequently, whether or not nature is uniform, the best approach one can take to making reliable inferences about the future or the unobserved is inductive inference.

Something we should infer from the problem of induction is that inductive inference always involves some risk. This is an inevitable aspect of ampliative and non-monotonic inference. But, on the other hand, moving beyond what we know for certain to hypothesize about what might be true is a powerful feature of science, and this requires reliance on inductive inference.

##### EXERCISES

7.7 Recall: Define inductive inference, inductive generalization, and inductive projection. Give an example of an inductive generalization and an example of an inductive projection.

7.8 Apply: Give a new example of a very strong inductive inference and a new example of a very weak inductive inference. For each, describe whether it is strong or weak, and label it as a generalization or projection.

7.9 Apply: Consider your example of a strong inductive inference in Exercise 7.8. Inductive inference is non-monotonic. What kinds of new information could you...

### 7.3 ABDUCTIVE INFERENCE

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Define abductive inference and articulate its similarities to and differences from both deductive and inductive inference
- Indicate how scientific arguments in favor of continental drift and pan-African evolution exemplify abductive inference
- Describe five explanatory considerations that contribute to the strength of abductive inferences

#### Continental drift

A century ago, most scientists thought that the Earth’s molten surface cooled billions of years ago and that the remnants of this cooling process are the major landmasses we see today. There were good reasons to accept the hypothesis that, once encrusted, the Earth’s surface was relatively fixed and stable. Yet some surprising geological features were left unaccounted for. One such feature is the congruence of some coastlines (think of Africa and South America), which is a puzzling coincidence if the continents had always been in their current locations. Further, geologic formations that are several thousands of kilometers away from one another had been found to have several characteristics in common. And fossils of some early types of plants and animals were distributed across multiple continents.

In 1915, the German scientist Alfred Wegener advanced a systematic proposal about the geologic history of Earth. He hypothesized that there had been a single original landmass, which he called Pangaea, that later fragmented into the continents. This hypothesis of continental drift suggested that, even today, continents might be very slowly drifting in relation to one another. If true, that hypothesis would account for the puzzling observations that otherwise lacked an explanation.

In the 1950s, American geologists Marie Tharp and Bruce Heezen were working to generate maps of the ocean floor. They made a fascinating observation about the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which is an extensive mountain range running the whole length (north to south) of the Atlantic Ocean, almost entirely underwater. They discovered that, at the top of that ridge, running its full length, was a valley. Further, many earthquakes originated in this valley. This observation fit with Wegener’s hypothesis of continental drift. Tharp and Heezen had, it seemed, discovered that the seafloor was spreading, further separating the landmasses on either side of the Atlantic Ocean. The edges of those landmasses, now quite distant from each other, were roughly congruent—a bit like jigsaw puzzle pieces fitting together.

Continental drift, if true, would account for all of this evidence. Like the shape of the continents on Earth, everything—all the observations—would then seem to fit together. Various other kinds of evidence came to light in investigations carried out in multiple fields of science, all supporting continental drift. Today, continental drift is part of the accepted theory of plate tectonics.

What kind of inference pattern was used when scientists eventually reasoned, from a variety of evidence, that the hypothesis of continental drift was true? This is clearly an ampliative inference, in that it goes beyond what’s contained in the evidence. So, it’s not deductive reasoning. But this doesn’t correspond very well to the pattern we’ve seen of inductive inference either; it’s not a generalization or projection from an observation of a certain kind, like the quality of an apple or level of lead in tap water, to the expectation of more observations of that kind. There’s a bigger leap involved in the inference from premises about geologic features to the conclusion that landmasses have separated and moved apart over the course of Earth’s history.

This is an abductive inference, a type of nondeductive inference that attributes special status to explanatory considerations. Abductive inference is also sometimes called inference to the best explanation. In reasoning abductively to some conclusion, one considers whether the conclusion, if true, would account for or explain the evidence used as premises.

#### The logic of abductive inference

Abductive inference is characterized by an appeal to explanatory considerations to conclude that some hypothesis is true. This is why abduction is also called **inference to the best explanation**

To reason abductively is, in a sense, to reason backwards. Its form is like this:

(1) Surprising observations, O1, O2, O3, ..., and On have been made.

(2) If H were true, this would explain O1, O2, O3, ..., and On.

∴ (3) H

Suppose, for example, that you know your roommate Theresa cut herself while preparing dinner last night. This morning, you see her walking down the hallway with stitches in her hand. The best explanation for the stitches seems to be that Theresa’s cut was severe enough that it required stitches. This conclusion might not be true. The cut might not have required stitches, and stitches can treat injuries other than cuts. But if the conclusion were true, it would account for the available evidence.

Characterized in this way, abductive inference is similar to the deductively invalid inference of affirming the consequent: from the premises if H then O, and O, the conclusion H does not validly follow. This argument scheme also corresponds to the H-D method scheme for confirmation, which is not deductively valid either. (The role for deductive inference in the H-D method was in the refutation scheme.)

There is an extra element present in the abductive inference scheme though, beyond what’s contained in the pattern of affirming the consequent or H-D confirmation. This extra element is the abductive inference’s ability to explain observations that would otherwise be surprising. An abductive inference isn’t any old instance of affirming the consequent. Instead, the thought is that, if the antecedent accounts for a consequent that would otherwise be left unexplained, then this is grounds for believing the antecedent is true. The power of a hypothesis to explain what is otherwise unexplainable is a reason to conclude that probably it is true.

Abductive inference is common in everyday and scientific reasoning. Examples include scientists reasoning from a rich variety of evidence and theory that extreme anthropogenic climate change is occurring, as detailed in Chapter 1; paleontologists using fossil evidence and the habits of contemporary creatures to infer the life histories of long-extinct species as detailed in Chapter 4; and Hubble piecing together astronomical data and physical theory to infer the approximate age of the universe as detailed in Chapter 6.

#### Abductive inference and explanatory considerations

Like inductive inference, abductive inferences are ampliative and non-monotonic, and their strength comes in degrees. But unlike inductive inference, abductive inference does not generalize or project from what has been observed to similar states of affairs. The strength of abductive inferences instead depends on explanatory considerations. Abductive inferences seem to rely on an inferential leap—a leap in the reasoning of one or more scientists having an “aha!” moment, of seeing how some new idea about the world might explain otherwise puzzling observations. Scientists employing abductive inference in favor of a hypothesis need to hope that their audience grasps the connection, that their audience sees how the hypothesis accounts for the observations. It’s not clear whether anything definitive can be said about what it takes for a hypothesis to accomplish that task.

How should a hypothesis relate to the observations in order to explain them? One suggestion is that a hypothesis best explains a set of observations if it predicts the observations or shows why the observations were to be expected. By itself, however, the predictive power of a hypothesis isn’t enough to make the hypothesis a good explanation. Explanations must also have additional qualities. Perhaps explanations should also be simple, fit with other explanations we already accept, and generate new expectations for what we will observe in the future. These qualities seem to make an abductively inferred hypothesis—an explanation—enlightening. Indeed, qualities like simplicity, coherence with other explanations, and fecundity of new ideas have been shown to play central roles in people’s assessment of explanatory goodness.

Given the difficulty of giving criteria for good explanations, it’s worth considering what features of abductive inferences contribute to their strength. In 1690, the Dutch mathematician and scientist Christian Huygens, in a discussion of how hypotheses about light could explain experimental findings in optics, proposed some principles that apply to strong abductive inference. He says:

>  It is possible . . . to establish a probability which is little short of certainty. This is the case when the consequences of the assumed principles are in perfect accord with the observed phenomena, and especially when these verifications are very numerous; but above all when one employs the hypothesis to predict new phenomena and finds his expectations realized.

Here Huygens points out the contribution to the strength of an abductive argument of a hypothesis perfectly predicting observations, of many observations being accounted for by the hypothesis, and when a hypothesis makes predictions that later turn out to be true.

First, the degree of an observation’s surprisingness and the degree to which the hypothesis dispels the surprisingness contributes to the strength of abductive inference. The finding of a rift down the center of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge with significant seismic activity would be extraordinary without different parts of the Earth’s crust moving in (very slow) motion. Second, it seems the number and variety of surprising observations that a hypothesis explains contributes to its strength—the more the better. The abductive argument for continental drift became stronger over the decades, as geological observations accumulated that would be expected if continental drift had occurred and that would be surprising otherwise. Third, Huygens notes that predicting new phenomena that are then discovered to occur is valuable for the strength of an abductive inference; this is like the value of a hypothesis’s fecundity noted previously. Beyond that, as we noted earlier, a hypothesis’s simplicity and coherence with other explanations also play a role.

Theories may also contribute to the strength of an abductive inference. These might be considered two additional explanatory considerations that increase the strength of an abductive inference.

An amazing discovery in Morocco illustrates how scientists can appeal to a hypothesis’s explanatory power as evidence in support of the hypothesis. In 2017, archaeologists and evolutionary anthropologists found several specimens of stone tools and human bones, including a remarkably complete jaw and skull fragments, at an archaeological site in Morocco named Jebel Irhoud. The researchers used dating techniques to determine that the remains were about 315,000 years old.

Previously, fossils from eastern sub-Saharan Africa were thought to belong to the first anatomically modern humans, the earliest representatives of our species Homo sapiens. From those fossils, scientists reasoned that humans evolved relatively quickly about 200,000 years ago in a region of what is now Ethiopia. This previously favored hypothesis could explain the findings at Jebel Irhoud as remains from some hominid species that lived prior to Homo sapiens, perhaps the Neanderthals. The Jebel Irhoud findings also prompted a new hypothesis, though: that the evolution of Homo sapiens was a pan-African process that occurred about 300,000 years ago—100,000 years earlier than posited by the previous hypothesis.

This new pan-Africa hypothesis was simpler than the previously favored hypothesis, as it didn’t require positing an archaic hominid species in North Africa that was later replaced by Homo sapiens. The pan-Africa hypothesis also cohered with archaeological and anatomical observations about Neanderthals and Homo sapiens. For example, the teeth found in Jebel Irhoud better matched what would be expected for Homo sapiens than for Neanderthals. The morphology of the skull was almost indistinguishable from that of anatomically modern humans. And the pan-Africa hypothesis is consistent with geographical and ecological evidence that, 300,000 years ago, the Sahara was green, filled with rivers, and hospitable. Animals like gazelles and lions that now inhabit the East African savanna then also populated the Saharan region. Remains of plants and animals even indicate biological and environmental continuity between those regions.

Finally, the new pan-Africa hypothesis explained a greater number of diverse observations about human origins than the earlier East Africa hypothesis, including the mix of anatomical features seen in the Jebel Irhoud remains and in other human-like fossils from elsewhere in Africa. It also better fits with genomic evidence collected in South Africa that seems to indicate that the lineage split between archaic hominid species and anatomically modern humans occurred more than 260,000 years ago.

Explanatory considerations, including simplicity, coherence, and fecundity, thus favored the pan-Africa hypothesis. This does not guarantee that the pan-Africa hypothesis is true, nor that the East Africa hypothesis is false. Abductive inference can’t provide guarantees. Perhaps new evidence will come to light favoring the East Africa hypothesis, or perhaps some even older remains of Homo sapiens have yet to be discovered. But for now, the inference to a pan-African conclusion looks like our best explanation. The researchers involved in the Jebel Irhoud discovery concluded, “the Garden of Eden in Africa is probably Africa—and it’s a big, big garden.”

##### EXERCISES

7.13 Recall: Define abductive inference and describe how it is similar to and different from each of deductive and inductive inference.

7.14 Apply: For each of the following inferences, indicate the conclusion, then state whether the inference is best interpreted as deductive, inductive, or abductive. Finally, indicate whether each inference is a good one, and justify your answer, appealing to validity, soundness, and strength as appropriate.

​	a. The murder weapon has Pat’s fingerprints on it. Therefore, Pat is the murderer.

​	b. Whenever it rains, the streets get wet; and the streets are wet now. So, this guarantees it rained.

​	c. These ten beans have been randomly selected from a 5-pound bag, and they are all Mayocobas instead of Cannellinis. So, all the beans from this bag are probably Mayocobas.

​	d. Of the students in my class, 65% say that they prefer coffee to tea. Therefore, most people prefer coffee.

​	e. Medical technologies ought to be funded if they can be used successfully to treat patients. Patients have been successfully treated with lobotomies. So, lobotomies ought to be funded.

​	f. Sociologists misuse the term equity and cannot agree on a definition. Therefore, the term equity is undefinable.

​	g. Without energy expenditures, disorder increases in a system. Your home is a system. So, the disorder of your home will increase unless energy is expended.

​	h. The last three US Republican presidents have denied that human activities are the main cause of global warming. So, human activities don’t cause global warming.

​	i. Bread appears to grow mold more quickly in the bread bin than the fridge, so temperature probably determines the rate of mold growth.

​	j. Leaded gasoline, paint, pipes, and other products with lead were all used throughout the 20th century but were eventually discontinued because they were toxic. So, all lead products are toxic.

7.15 Apply: Write out the logical form of abductive inference as depicted in this section. Then, choose either the continental drift or pan-Africa hypothesis, and write out the abductive inference supporting the hypothesis in this logical form. Try to include all the evidence supporting the abductive inference.

7.16 Think: Come up with an example of abductive inference in science not described in depth in this section. (a) Indicate why this should be viewed as an abductive inference. (b) Assess the explanatory strength of the inference. (c) If you were a scientist focused on this inference, what kinds of steps could you carry out to additionally support the conclusion?

7.17 Recall: Describe five explanatory considerations that contribute to the strength of abductive inferences.

7.18 Apply: Choose three of the five explanatory considerations that contribute to the strength of abductive inferences. Illustrate each with a new example of abductive inference from science or everyday life.

### 7.4 TESTIMONY AND TRUST

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Describe the roles of testimony and trust in scientific reasoning
- Indicate how reliance on testimony involves abductive inference
- List three considerations influencing whether testimony should be believed

#### Testimony

The testimony of others plays a central role in reasoning. Many of your beliefs actually originate from what other people think is true. Consider how you know simple things, like your friend’s birthdate or the customary ingredients in macaroni and cheese. Chances are, you learned things like these from things other people told you—or things people wrote down in a cookbook or published online.

This is the same in science. Scientists must rely on the testimony of others to learn the state of knowledge and accepted methods in a field, to collaborate on research, and to properly interpret others’ findings. By testimony, we mean a spoken or written statement that something is the case. Others’ testimony is regularly used as evidence for concluding that something—what they say is so—is true.

Believing others’ testimony requires trust. Imagine you were a resident of Flint, Michigan, in 2014. You attended a community meeting, where the governor reported that the city water is safe to drink. To demonstrate this, he himself drinks some tap water. From this testimony, you infer that the water is safe. But your water is still discolored with a foul smell and taste, and, later, you learn water testing revealed serious lead contamination. This information undermines your earlier inference from the governor’s testimony; you no longer believe Flint’s water is safe to drink. After that, you will probably be less likely to take city and state officials’ word for the safety of your water.

In science, belief in others’ testimony is a key component involved in the balance of trust and skepticism that we saw in Chapter 1 is crucial for science. Science is collaborative: several scientists typically conduct research together. Sometimes this even includes thousands of scientists, like at CERN or NASA. When scientists collaborate, they have to rely on the specific expertise and the honesty of their collaborators in order to believe what they say (or write) is true. This trust in the testimony of collaborators is essential for many scientific projects. Reliance on the testimony of research subjects or nonscientific collaborators is also essential in some disciplines. An example is when researchers doing ethnographic fieldwork must rely on the testimony of locals to understand social or cultural practices. Trustworthy sources are essential to the legitimacy of their research findings.

To trust someone’s testimony, we must believe they are knowledgeable, competent, sincere, and honest. Researchers need to be able to trust that researchers they collaborate with or learn from are knowledgeable about what they profess to know, competent at what they say they will do, sincere in what they claim, and honest enough not to make up data or results. Researchers also must be able to trust that survey participants are sincere, that scientific journals only publish vetted research, and more.

##### Box 7.1 When testimony justifies belief

Someone stops you in the street to tell you there is life outside our planet. You had no opinion about this before, and purely based on this person’s testimony you come to believe that there is extraterrestrial life. Is your belief justified? That is, should you believe what that person says? Suppose you learn the person is a cosmologist working in a large collaborative project searching for intelligent extraterrestrial life. Would you be any more justified in believing them now? What if instead you learned they are the CEO of a social media company? Philosophers debate the conditions, if any, in which somebody’s testimony about a topic justifies belief. According to a view called anti-reductionism about testimony, other people’s word is a basic source of justification for our beliefs, similar to perceptual evidence. On this view, unless you have evidence that a speaker is unreliable, insincere, or untrustworthy, you are justified in accepting what they tell you. The opposite view, reductionism about testimony, holds that testimony is not a basic source of justification. On this view, the word of others justifies your beliefs only insofar as you have independent, positive evidence for their reliability, impartiality, and expertise. Such evidence is based on your perceptual experiences, memory, and reasoning. Hence, on this view, beliefs based on testimonial evidence are justified by empirical evidence and reasoning, just like all other beliefs.

Public trust in scientific institutions and findings is equally important. Community members must be able to trust that lead testing of their tap water, for example, is carried out competently and reported honestly. People also need to be able to trust that the accumulated knowledge in textbooks and other resources is written by knowledgeable authors, based on competently conducted research, and honestly conveyed. Ultimately, public trust in science is required for people to believe the testimony of scientists and scientific institutions, which is crucial for sharing in scientific knowledge.

The problem with testimony is that sometimes people can be dishonest, insincere, or unreliable. So, under what conditions does someone’s testimony give sufficient reason to believe what they say is true?

#### Testimonial evidence as abductive inference

When making inferences from testimony, the statement that a source makes is a premise, and perhaps even the only premise, used for concluding that it is true. Because people can lie, make up fantasies, or simply be wrong, inference from testimony is risky. This is certainly not deductive inference. But it may be plausibly described as a form of abductive inference. When we believe a statement is true based on someone’s testimony, we do so because the truth of the statement is the best explanation for why the person would say it is so. We might characterize this as follows, drawing from the form of abductive inference introduced in the previous section:

1. This individual or group asserts A.
2. If A were true, this would explain why they asserted A.
3. ∴ A

There are a few things worth noticing about this simple characterization. First, the identity of the individual or group in question is relevant. If we have reason to trust the party in question, their testimony provides greater reason to think something is the case. One way to think about that is that a trustworthy source asserting something would be more surprising—less explainable—unless their assertion were true. And, on the other hand, if the party in question might have other reasons to provide this testimony besides its truth, this decreases the strength of the inference. This accounts for why one may be more inclined to believe a scientist’s claim about Flint’s water quality than the governor. The best explanation for the governor’s claim of safety may not be the truth of that claim but instead his desire to reassure the public and, perhaps, protect himself from any blame.

Second, the more remarkable the assertion, the more evidence we require to rationally infer it is true, even from a trustworthy source. Testimony that violates what we think we know about the world—such as by going against established scientific theories or violating specific memories we have—may not be grounds for belief. That testimony may still be explained by its truth, but a better explanation may turn out to be that the person making the assertion is mistaken or we are misunderstanding.

Third, because abductive inference is non-monotonic, more premises can be sought to increase (or decrease) the strength of the argument. When in doubt about some testimony, more evidence can be collected. Do other trusted parties also claim the assertion is true? Does the person whose testimony you are considering have reason to be dishonest or lack credibility for any other reason? Is there independent, non-testimonial evidence for the assertion? And so on.

Thus, thinking about inference from testimony as a kind of abductive inference may help distinguish the circumstances in which testimony provides sufficient grounds for belief from when it does not. Expertise about the topic of the claim means someone is less likely to be wrong about the claim. The motivations of the person providing testimony can be taken into consideration to determine the likelihood of intentional deception. Remarkable testimony requires more evidence to warrant belief and, when in doubt, we can seek additional evidence, testimonial and otherwise. An assessment of a source’s credibility and the credibility of their claim is essential in determining when testimony is sufficient reason for belief—and when it should instead be regarded with skepticism.

#### Trust in science

Not every claim a scientist makes is true, and scientific institutions have on occasion made statements that were incorrect or even intentionally misleading. Still, numerous features of science—as a set of institutions—make it worthy of public trust.

We have surveyed many of these features in this book or will do so in the chapters still to come. In Chapter 1, we saw how the social norms of science contribute to its trustworthiness. And the defining features of science also introduced in Chapter 1 contribute to its power to generate trustworthy knowledge. Techniques of collecting and analyzing data in experiments, studies, and modeling support the evidential basis for scientific knowledge (Chapters 3 – 5), and sound tools for inference support the development of sound and strong arguments from that evidence (Chapters 6 and 7).

For these reasons, we should take established scientific knowledge to be authoritative. Further, assertions by individual scientists with relevant expertise are generally reason to believe what they say is true.

Yet it also should be acknowledged that public trust in science faces some challenges.

The health sciences have a problematic history of race and gender discrimination in research as well as in medical care, which has resulted in heightened distrust of medical advice and care. Members of some religious groups in the US are much less likely to believe scientific reports of climate change and its disastrous impacts.

In 2019, researchers finally reported that clean tap water was available in the homes of Flint, Michigan. The path to this point was a long journey of scientific research, public policy, and politics. But, $400 million of state and federal support has resulted in a clean water source, modern copper pipes to nearly every home that lacked them, and water filters for any residents who want them. Testing shows Flint’s water is as good as any in Michigan. But a few weeks later, for the UN’s World Water Day, the City of Flint brought in several semitrucks filled with bottled water, and Flint residents flocked to pick it up. Jim Ananich, a lifelong Flint resident and state politician, said:

>  I can’t tell somebody they should trust [claims that the water is safe], because I don’t trust them—and I have more information than most people. Science and logic would tell me that it should be OK, but people have lied to me.

This distrust of municipal water supply isn’t just in Flint, and low-income households and communities of color are most likely to purchase bottled water due to distrust of local supply. Yet bottled water is less well-regulated than tap water.

##### Box 7.2 Science denial

In this section, we’ve summarized reasons for science’s trustworthiness and a few sources of public distrust of science. One contributing factor to public distrust of science is social identity—one’s political affiliation, religion, ethnic community, and so on. In recent decades, there has been increasing belief polarization about scientific topics along religious and political lines in particular, such as about climate change research and evolutionary biology. Sometimes distrust in science goes even further: some people who reject some particular scientific finding use that as reason to disparage science as a credible source of knowledge in general. This is sometimes called science denial.

Social science research about science denial has suggested that increasing knowledge about science actually doesn’t eliminate science denial. Instead, increased scientific knowledge correlates with heightened belief polarization about scientific findings. Increasingly, people with different social identities are exposed only to ideas and information from others with similar social identities. This increases belief polarization. Some small groups are at the extreme—like those who advocate. for the belief that the Earth is flat, despite all the evidence to the contrary. But belief polarization is something that affects all of us. This makes it even more important to seek credible sources of information and to assess the grounds for believing ideas you encounter. Evaluating the credibility of ideas’ source and content is perhaps even more crucial for ideas that appeal to us because of our social identity.

Scientists are stepping up to help with distrust like this. For example, Caren Cooper at North Carolina State University, with funding from the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), is working with community members across the United States to test drinking water and water supply lines for safety. This initiative, “Crowd the Tap,” offers resources for teachers and high school students, utility companies, faith communities, and any other members of a community to test local water supplies and to demonstrate their safety.

# EXERCISES

7.19 Recall: How does scientific reasoning rely on testimony? How does relying on testimony require trust?

7.20 Recall: Describe what features reliance on testimony has in common with abductive inference.

7.21 Think: Describe a time when you relied on someone’s testimony as evidence you should believe something. Then, try to characterize this as an abductive inference, specifying the premises and conclusion. Is abductive inference a good way to think about this use of testimony? Why or why not?

7.22 Recall: List the three considerations suggested in this section that influence whether testimony should be believed and give an example of how each applies.

7.23 Apply: Consider the three considerations suggested in this section that influence whether testimony should be believed. For each of these considerations, describe how scientific practices are developed to increase the strength of testimonial evidence in favor of established scientific knowledge.

##### FURTHER READING

For an account of the political and public transitions following the Flint water crisis, see Robertson, D. (2020). Flint has clean water now. Why won’t people drink it? Politico. www.politico.com/news/magazine/2020/12/23/flint-water-crisis-2020-post-coronavirus-america-445459

For a philosophical treatment of inductive reasoning, see Goodman, N. (1955). *Fact, fiction, and forecast*. Harvard University Press.

For the original problem of induction, see §§4–6 of Hume, D. (1748/1999). *An enquiry concerning human understanding*. Oxford University Press.

 For a helpful guide to Hume’s problem of induction, see Salmon, W. (1975). Chapter: An encounter with David Hume. In J. Feinberg’s (Ed.), *Reason and responsibility* (pp. 245–263) Dickenson Publishing Co.

  For more on abductive reasoning, see Lipton, P. (2003). *Inference to the best explanation*. Routledge.

For an analysis of public trust in science related to health, see Goldenberg, M. J. (2021). *Vaccine hesitancy: Public trust, expertise, and the war on science*. University of Pittsburgh Press.
