## CHAPTER 12 Explaining and theorizing

###  12.1 PSYCHIATRY AND SCIENTIFIC THEORIES

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Summarize psychiatric knowledge bearing on depression and its treatment
- Describe the primary features of scientific theories and why they are important to science
- Indicate how scientific theories go beyond hypotheses

#### Understanding and treating depression

Depression is a mood disorder—not just mere sadness or some kind of pessimism. There is extensive variation in the patterns and severity of symptoms that clinically depressed patients experience. People afflicted by major depressive episodes often feel tired, irritable, and distracted; their thoughts and affect turn negative; activities they once found fun don’t elicit the same level of joy or interest; their motivation to spend time with friends or family diminishes; and despair and hopelessness set in.

Approximately one in 20 adults (or 5%) worldwide experience a major depressive episode. Rates of clinical depression are rising steeply—especially amongst young adults in affluent countries. We know there are many causes of this disease, including social, psychological, and biological factors. People who have gone through traumatic events, for example, are more likely to develop depression. Disrupted sleep patterns, including disruptions caused by smartphone use, are a contributing factor to depression and other mood disorders. Obesity and depression can undergo feedback loops, where each condition makes the other condition worse. Dysfunctions in neuron growth and brain connectivity are salient in patients with clinical depression, too. And family and twin studies have highlighted various genetic factors associated with an increased risk of developing depression. These genetic, neurological, health, psychological, and social factors are among the known causes of this debilitating disorder.

Despite knowledge about some of the causal influences on depression, psychiatric understanding of depression remains limited. There’s no clear-cut way to diagnose depression. Standard definitions of depression in diagnostic manuals are qualitative, listing clusters of possible symptoms.

##### Signs of depression

FIGURE 12.1 shows a high degree of comorbidity, which means that if a patient has depression, then that person is also likely to suffer from other conditions, such as anxiety, alcohol abuse, and bipolar disorder. Further, many of the associations that have been found between depression and genes, brain structures, and psychological and social events are weak or uncertain. These and other challenges mean that, currently, there is no general theory of depression—that is, no well‐established conception of what it is or account of how it unfolds.

The medical treatment of depression is also a mixed bag. Several treatments work in many—but not all—cases. A number of antidepressant drugs are commonly prescribed as treatment, but it can be difficult to find the best medication or combination of medications for a specific patient, and effectiveness may change over time. Psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, is often an effective non‐pharmacological approach to treating depression. But the efficacy of psychotherapy varies, and it’s unclear when any one therapeutic approach will be particularly promising in treating depression. Psychedelic compounds and deep‐brain electrical stimulation are sometimes used when medication and psychotherapy aren’t effective. They show some promise, but research into the safety and efficacy of these treatments is ongoing.

#### Scientific theories

Chapter 1 discussed how science aims at the production of knowledge—an aim that is constitutive of the very meaning of the word science. We also saw that science aims to produce a distinctive kind of knowledge: scientific knowledge is explanatory knowledge of why or how the natural world is the way it is. Scientists aren’t simply accumulating a list of confirmed hypotheses about our world and ourselves. The project is bolder: scientists are charged with helping us understand why, and how, things happen. Scientists are asked to furnish the tools for making sense of, predicting, and changing the world around us. To accomplish this, they develop scientific theories, which are comprehensive accounts of phenomena, broader and more explanatory than individual hypotheses and models, and backed by more evidence. In studying depression, psychiatric researchers have discovered a variety of explanatory factors bearing on the mental illness, as well as a variety of approaches to treating it. But, while there is now much more knowledge about incidence and causes of depression and effective treatments, psychiatry is still far from a satisfactory understanding of the mental illness.

Theories often go beyond what is readily observable. The Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection is a grand theory about the origins of all the diverse lifeforms on Earth, and Einstein’s theory of relativity is a grand theory about the very nature of gravity, space, and time. Empirical evidence has been central to testing and confirming the content of these and other theories. But that content is more expansive than just what we’re led to expect to observe in some particular circumstance. Evolutionary theory, for example, indicates what happened from the earliest years of life on Earth, and the various hypotheses comprising it have been confirmed by a wide variety of forms of converging evidence, from extensive fossil records and geophysical data to features and relationships among current lifeforms. As we saw in Chapter 3, relativity theory was dramatically confirmed by the light deflection observed during an eclipse, but the theory also tells us what would happen if we traveled at the speed of light and gives us a reason to believe that nothing but light will ever travel that fast.

In ordinary language, the term theory is sometimes used to mean that some thought is only a guess or that it hasn’t been tested out. Scientific theories are not like that. Quite the opposite, scientific theories are major accomplishments, as both the Darwinian theory of evolution and Einstein’s theory of relativity illustrate. Yet, because scientific theories have implications that are not immediately observable, they are never taken to be true beyond all doubt, no matter how much empirical data supports them. Scientists couldn’t be more certain of the theories of evolution and relativity. Even so, it’s possible that someday one or another of these theories, or another theory among our prized scientific achievements, will be replaced by a better theory. This possibility is due to the open and self-correcting nature of science.

Just as scientific theories go beyond the readily observable, theories also come about not simply by generalizing from observations. Often, when a new theory is formed, this is from a significant conceptual shift—some feat of imagination—that gives rise to a new way of thinking about observations. Darwin wondered whether the similar forms of life he observed across continents might be evidence that they dispersed from some ancient common ancestor. And he was inspired by an economist, Thomas Richard Malthus, about the pressures to survive created by population increases. Einstein was inspired by the puzzle of how to set clocks that are far apart to the exact same time, and by how observers’ experiences vary depending on whether they are in motion, to reconsider the very nature of space and time. In both cases, extensive observations

Explaining and theorizing were subsequently obtained to empirically support the theories. But the initial idea was a kind of spark of insight, a different way of thinking about what we already know about the world.

##### Box 12.1 Reductionism, integration, and complex systems

Historically, many scientists and philosophers of science have expected that appealing to the fundamental laws of physics will ultimately explain all the features of the world, even in biological organisms and societies. This view is called reductionism. The idea behind this is that everything in the universe is composed of physical matter (sometimes called physicalism) and so their features are all explained by the laws governing physical matter. But reductionism has fallen out of favor. Even if everything in the world is made of physical matter and subject to physical law, our scientific knowledge of physics isn’t likely to give us predictions and explanations of, say, how cognition works or how biological organisms have evolved. Over the past century or so, there have also been two trends in scientific research that seem to run counter to reductionism. First, many scientific questions have been productively explored by bringing together and integrating research from multiple fields. Our knowledge of depression, for example, is informed by research in neuroscience, molecular biology, cognitive science, and the social sciences. This pattern of integration contrasts with what we would expect if reductionism were true. Second, scientific research in several areas has productively advanced by recognizing patterns in behavior across systems with very different physical compositions. Complex systems research—across many fields of science and relying on a variety of methodologies, particularly from network theory and dynamical systems theory—productively explores how interactions shape phenomena and seeks patterns across very different types of systems.

##### EXERCISES

12.1 Recall: Summarize scientific knowledge about depression. Remember to consider what we know about its causes, its treatment, and related knowledge about human emotional regulation.

12.2 Think: What might a theory of depression offer that goes beyond the current state of scientific knowledge about depression? Motivate your response by referencing features of theories described in this section.

12.3 Recall: Define scientific theory and describe three primary features of scientific theories based on the discussion in this section.

12.4 Think: Briefly summarize the theory of evolution, and describe how the theory of evolution exhibits the three primary features of scientific theories. (You may need to) 

12.5 Recall: What do scientific theories add to science, beyond the processes of hypothesis-testing we have mostly focused on in this book? How does theorizing relate to hypothesis-testing?

12.6 Apply: Review the discussion of the Higgs boson discovery in Chapter 10. This discovery provided additional confirmation of the so-called standard model in physics. Investigate this theory, and then answer the following questions about it as best you can.

1. What is the theory a theory of—that is, what phenomena is it supposed to be about?
2. What are the central parts of the theory?
3. What kind of evidence has been used to support the theory?
4. Does the standard model make claims about things that we can’t directly observe? About what kinds of things?
5. What are some of the considerations that sparked the development of the theory?
6. Has the theory undergone any changes over time? What change(s) and why?

### 12.2 USING SCIENCE TO EXPLAIN

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Describe the scientific goal of providing explanation and say why it is important
- Define the nomological, pattern‐based, and causal accounts of explanation
- List one advantage and two problems with each of these three accounts of explanation

We said that scientific theories are important for producing explanatory knowledge. The explanatory knowledge produced in science is a special kind, explicitly supported by evidence through the use of methods discussed in this book. But there’s significant overlap between scientific and everyday forms of explanation, too. All of us sometimes notice things that cry out for explanation. We routinely ask questions like “Why did you kiss him?” “How much does exercise improve my health?” “Why did the economic crisis happen?” “How did the dinosaurs go extinct?” Even children regularly engage in this pursuit of explanatory knowledge.

Many children—and adults too—have wondered why the sky is blue. A parent might quickly answer that the sky is blue because it looks that way to us, or because that’s just the way the sky is. Such answers don’t explain why the sky is blue; they offer no insight into why or how the phenomenon is the way it is. A satisfying explanation of why the sky is blue relies on some sophisticated scientific theorizing: sunlight travels in straight lines unless some obstruction either reflects it, like a mirror; bends it, like a prism; or scatters it, like the molecules of gas in the Earth’s atmosphere. Because blue light has shorter wavelengths, it is scattered more than other colors in the spectrum. That’s why we normally see a blue sky. In contrast to most parents’ quick answers to this question, this explanation appeals to other facts about the world and scientific laws or theories to give a deeper understanding of the phenomenon.

Generating explanations plays important cognitive roles. As we discussed in Chapter 7 with abductive reasoning—also known as inference to the best explanation—explanatory considerations can be used as evidence in support of a hypothesis, making the hypothesis more credible. Generating explanations to oneself or to others also routinely facilitates the integration of new information into existing bodies of knowledge and can lead to deeper understanding; this is called the self-explanation effect. Performance on a variety of reasoning tasks can be improved when one is asked to explain. That’s why explaining ideas and responding to explanatory questions is such a good way to learn new material. And instructors and tutors learn material faster and with more depth of insight in virtue of explaining it to others.

Perhaps most important among its cognitive roles, explanation produces understanding. Understanding the world around and within us is a supreme achievement that is central to science. Understanding is a kind of insight, grasping why or how something came about or is the way it is. This makes it possible for us to intervene in the world and to anticipate what will happen next. When we understand how a system works—say, the tidal system of the San Francisco Bay, an example from Chapter 5—we can anticipate how changes in some features of the system (like the Reber plan) will lead to changes in some other features (tides, salinity, and so forth).

Because explanations generate understanding, they satisfy our curiosity. To satisfy our curiosity and have that experience of “Aha! Now I get it!” can feel really good. Psychologist Alison Gopnik once likened understanding to orgasm. Sex evolved to feel good because it leads to babies, which is needed for a species to continue. Similarly, Gopnik reasoned, understanding is enjoyable because explanations help people navigate their environment. And so, the desire to satisfy our curiosity has led humans to ever more sophisticated and accurate theories about our world.

The satisfaction of curiosity is no guarantee of a good explanation, though. Sometimes people have a sense that they understand something without genuinely understanding it—explanations can be wrong. People also can fall prey to an illusion of explanatory depth, believing they understand the world more clearly and in greater detail than they actually do. We all regularly overestimate our competence and depth of knowledge; recall our discussion in Chapter 1 of the cognitive errors, like confirmation bias, that science is designed to correct for.

An illustration of how one can be dangerously misled by the feeling they understand something is the public reception of climate change research. As you may recall, climate change was originally called “global warming.” But this terminology misled many people about what they should expect to experience. When a season was not warmer than usual in some location, some people were tempted to doubt the reality of climate change, for it seemed to them as if things weren’t getting warmer after all. But climate change does not produce warmer temperatures in every location at every point in time. Instead, it produces a global increase in average temperatures over time, as well as increasingly extreme weather—both hot and cold—and storms.

Another example of the illusion of explanatory depth concerns public reception of neuroscience. Experimental data suggest that people are often misled into judging bad psychological explanations as better than they really are when those bad explanations are accompanied by completely irrelevant neuroscience information. The allure of neuroscience information, which sounds technical and cites biological details, might interfere with people’s ability to critically evaluate the overall quality of an explanation. This interference can have negative practical effects when, for example, it is exploited by advertisements for “brain training” that promise cognitive enhancement. This is the opposite of the climate change case. Instead of scientific expertise being disregarded because of personal experience, scientific credibility is misapplied to get people to believe something there’s not actually sufficient evidence for.

Given the centrality of explanation to science and the potential for all people, including scientists, to feel like they understand something even when they do not, it’s an important task to clarify the nature of scientific explanation. If we can say what features good explanations must have, then we will be better able to judge whether something counts as an adequate explanation.

Philosophers of science have thought long and hard about what features scientific explanations should have. Some have suggested that explanations should cite laws of nature in order to account for phenomena. Another idea is that explanations should show how phenomena fit into patterns. Still others have suggested that explaining is a kind of causal reasoning, and that explanations should state what causes a phenomenon.

#### Explaining with laws and patterns

The idea of successful explanations appealing to scientific laws is at the heart of the nomological account of explanation (from the Greek nomos, meaning law). According to this view, phenomena are explained only when explanations reference laws that can account for them.

The nomological account of explanation was developed most fully by the philosopher of science Carl Hempel. Hempel proposed that explanations are logical arguments that appeal to general scientific laws to derive statements about the occurrence of the phenomena we want to explain. Hempel thought that some nomological explanations were valid deductive arguments, while others were strong inductive arguments. In either case, the premises must include at least one scientific law, which enables us to derive the phenomenon we want to explain. Hempel believed that knowing the scientific laws and background conditions that guarantee or make very likely the occurrence of the phenomenon would lead people to realize the phenomenon in question was to be expected. By rendering phenomena expectable, scientific explanations reveal our world to be ordered, proceeding in accordance with general laws.

Many scientific explanations fit this nomological account of explanation. Consider how scientists might explain the increase in the average global temperature of Earth’s atmosphere. Energy from stars that reaches a planet is reflected off planetary surfaces. Greenhouse gases—carbon dioxide, water vapor, methane, and others—have molecular structures that absorb energy and then release it. Greater concentration of greenhouse gases in an atmosphere thus leads to increased temperature at the surface of a planet. These are law-like generalizations that describe these regularities in nature. Next, note that the concentration of greenhouse gases in Earth’s atmosphere has increased. This is a background condition, a fact about current circumstances here on Earth. Together, these claims deductively imply the conclusion that the Earth’s average temperature has increased. This argument is deductively valid with all true premises, yielding a simple nomological explanation of global warming.

##### Box 12.2   Scientific laws

Historically, many scientists have taken the purpose of science to be discovering laws of nature, which can in turn be used to provide explanations and make predictions. Examples include Newton’s law of universal gravitation in physics; the three laws of thermodynamics, central to physics and chemistry; and the laws of supply and demand in economics. A scientific law can be thought of as a set of rules for inferring what must follow from some set of conditions.

The law of supply, for example, is a way to infer the relative price of goods from the quantity of goods supplied. Newton’s law of universal gravitation is a way to infer the force between two bodies based on their masses and the distance between them. And yet, many useful scientific insights do not provide exceptionless rules for how things must occur. Indeed, the law of supply in economics is at best an approximation for how supply influences price. Even Newton’s law of universal gravitation fails to take into account the influence of other forces, such as magnetic charge. Further, many scientific advances do not even attempt to capture laws of nature at all. Philosophers of science thus debate what is required for something to count as a law, as well as the extent to which scientific inquiry involves discovering laws as opposed to, say, causal mechanisms.

Just as phenomena can be explained by laws, scientific laws themselves can be explained by appealing to other, more comprehensive laws. For example, consider Galileo’s law that bodies fall toward Earth at a constant acceleration. This law can be deductively derived from the Newtonian law of gravitation. The Newtonian force of gravity explains the constant acceleration of bodies falling toward Earth. Newtonian laws, in turn, can be explained by appealing to the more comprehensive general theory of relativity developed by Einstein. The Earth’s gravity is explained as a distortion of space caused by the Earth’s mass. Objects speed up as they fall toward Earth, just as a ball rolling from the edge to the center of a bowl speeds up.

The idea of explaining scientific laws with reference to other, more general laws introduces a second account of explanation. According to the pattern account, explanations fit particular facts into a more general framework of laws and principles. This also has been called a unification account of explanation, since the number of assumptions required to explain phenomena decreases when an explanation is provided. Descriptions of phenomena, and scientific laws as well, are unified by uncovering the basic patterns that govern them.

Although we previously gave a nomological explanation of global warming, this can also be construed as a pattern explanation. The phenomenon of anthropogenic global warming on Earth due to human activities is explained as one instance of a general pattern of atmospheric effects on planetary climate, a pattern that also includes Earth before human activity drastically increased greenhouse gas concentration in the atmosphere and other planets with different atmospheres entirely.

One advantage of the pattern account over the nomological account is that it doesn’t require scientific explanations to cite laws. Pattern explanations can cite regularities that may not qualify as laws. In place of the law requirement, there’s an emphasis on descriptions that fit the phenomenon to be explained into a wider pattern, to see the phenomenon as one instance of a more general regularity. Our earlier discussion of depression illustrates the advantage of this. Scientific knowledge of depression is not developed enough to provide scientific laws that convey the relations between.

300 Explaining and theorizing properties of this disorder and that govern the occurrence of depression or effectiveness of treatments. Indeed, the phenomenon of depression may not be governed by general laws at all. But there are still descriptions of patterns that can be explanatory.

For example, to explain why selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (or SSRIs), the most commonly prescribed category of depression medication, are effective, one can point out that low serotonin levels are associated with depression, and taking SSRIs increases serotonin concentration in the brain by blocking its reabsorption by neurons. There is no law that decreasing serotonin leads to depression or that increasing it will effectively treat depression. But there is a broad pattern between serotonin levels and depression that this explanation, and the treatment itself, rely upon.

Another example comes from evolutionary theory, which explains many facts about the traits of organisms and the relationships among them with reference to a simple pattern that plays out in a multitude of ways. The pattern at the heart of evolutionary theory is that natural selection acts on variation among organisms to produce cumulative change in species. The theory of evolution is not a single general law of nature. It recognizes many different influences on evolution and that evolution proceeds in different ways depending on several factors. Evolutionary explanations are thus not productively construed as nomological explanations. But they do conform to the pattern account rather well.

The idea behind the nomological and pattern accounts of explanation—that explanations make phenomena less surprising by referencing laws or by showing how they fit into a wider pattern—captures important features of many scientific explanations. But both also face significant objections.

We’ve already encountered one problem with the nomological account: many good explanations don’t appeal to any scientific laws. We saw this with evolutionary explanations and with the example of explaining why SSRIs treat depression.

The pattern account faces a related difficulty. It focuses on explanations that show how to fit a phenomenon into a wider pattern, but some explanations are highly specific. Consider the explanation for humans’ large brains. As early hominids (ancestral humans) faced environmental changes and developed more complex social exchanges, this led to the selection for and eventual evolution of increasingly large and complex brains, eventually tripling human brain size from its ancestral size. Brain size increased especially rapidly between about 800,000 and 200,000 years ago. This explanation is compelling, and there’s significant evidence backing it up. But it is also highly specific. It appeals to the general pattern of evolutionary theory, again, selection acting on variation to produce cumulative change; but much of the explanation is highly specific to humans' unique evolutionary past.

A second problem for both nomological and pattern accounts is that they neglect a key feature of explanation: asymmetry. If one thing explains another, then this explanatory relation does not usually hold in reverse. Consider the following example. Your mobile phone sends you a weather alert, and you explain this with reference to the fact that a storm is approaching and the generalization that weather alerts are sent out when storms are approaching. But, it seems, this explanation doesn’t work in reverse. You can’t explain the approaching storm by citing the weather alert you received and the generalization that weather alerts are sent out when storms are approaching. This mixes things up: the storm isn’t approaching because you received the weather alert. The weather alert gives you evidence of the storm, but it isn’t an explanation for why the storm is happening.

But the nomological and pattern accounts of explanation don’t illuminate this asymmetry. According to the requirements for explanation on those views, a generalization about weather alerts being sent out when storms approaching and the background condition of receiving a weather alert should explain the storm occurring! This seems strange to say the least. An approaching storm can be a good explanation for why you receive a weather alert, but the weather alert is no explanation for why the storm is approaching. You can do a lot with your mobile phone, but you can’t usually bring about a storm.

#### Causal explanation

Another account of explanation is inspired by this asymmetry of explanation that the nomological and pattern accounts fail to illuminate. According to the causal account of explanation, explanations appeal to causes that bring about the phenomenon to be explained. On this view, appealing to the approaching storm explains the weather alert on your phone because the storm causes weather alerts to be sent out. But, as we just noted, your phone’s weather alert doesn’t cause the storm—so on the causal account of explanation, it doesn’t explain the storm either.

The causal account seems to apply well to many explanations in science, including in fields that have not developed scientific laws. As we emphasized in Chapter 11, knowledge of causes enables prediction and manipulation of phenomena, via intervention on causal factors. It’s plausible that identifying causal factors is also central to explanation.

In one variety of causal explanation, the focus concerns how causal factors regularly combine into systems that produce the target phenomenon. Some call this variety of explanation mechanistic. The search for causal mechanisms seems to play an especially important role in some parts of the social and life sciences. For example, the scientific explanation of an organism’s regulation of blood sugar appeals to how pancreatic endocrine hormones maintain blood sugar within a range of about 70–110 mg per 100 ml blood. If glucose (blood sugar) decreases below this range, pancreatic alpha cells secrete glucagon, which causes the liver to release stored glucose. If blood sugar increases above the range, pancreatic beta cells secrete insulin, which causes adipose tissue to absorb glucose from the blood. This explanation is also part of the explanation of diabetes, which is a disorder characterized by the pancreas producing insufficient amounts of insulin. This explanation displays how an interrelationship among pancreatic hormones, liver tissue, and blood sugar ordinarily work together in a complex way to maintain blood sugar levels within a narrow range.

We’ve seen that the causal account of explanation accommodates the asymmetry of explanation. It can also address the other concern raised earlier with the nomological and pattern accounts of explanation, that not all explanations seem to feature scientific laws or to describe broad patterns. Some causal relationships follow very general patterns, or are law-like in nature, but others are not. If you heat ice, it will melt or evaporate. There are virtually no exceptions to this. If you heat chocolate, it will usually melt—but if you heat it too quickly, it gets thick and lumpy instead. This is a general pattern, but it has some exceptions. In contrast, perhaps the evolution of large brains will only happen once in history. Perhaps background conditions had to be just right for such a trait to evolve. But all of these, from the law-like to the highly particular, are still cause-effect relationships. And on the causal account, all are successful explanations.

However, the causal account of explanation faces its own difficulties. First, just as it seems some explanations may not cite laws or patterns, it also seems that other explanations don’t cite causes. For example, we said previously that Einstein’s general theory of relativity explains why Newtonian law of gravitation holds, which in turn explains Galileo’s law of constant acceleration. But it would be strange to say that general relativity causes the Newtonian law of gravitation, or that the law of gravitation causes constant acceleration. A related concern is that, if it is right that general patterns and scientific laws can help us understand the world, at least sometimes, then the causal account of explanation is lacking because it doesn’t identify that explanatory value.

A second difficulty with the causal account of explanation stems from the observation that many phenomena have many causes. For this reason, causal explanations may come too easily. Causal explanations may cite only one or a few causal influences, when we know there are many causal influences on the phenomenon that’s explained. How is this enough to explain the phenomenon? Some respond to this challenge by saying that the more causal information you can give, the better explanation you have. Others seek another principle to decide what causal information belongs in an explanation.

Yet another difficulty is that, as discussed in Chapter 11, there are different conceptions of what causation is, but an account of causal explanation requires a successful definition of causation.

So far, we have talked about these three accounts of explanation as if one is right and the others wrong. But it’s possible that each account captures certain elements of what helps us understand the world. One initial reason to think this might be so is that each of these accounts of explanation aptly characterize some, but not all, of the examples of successful explanation we have discussed. Perhaps laws, patterns, and causes all can contribute to our understanding, and so any of these can be an ingredient of explanation, even if none is involved in every single explanation in science.

# EXERCISES

1. Recall: What are three ways explanation is useful for our thinking? How are these valuable to science?
2. Think: In your own words, describe why explanation is important to science.
3. Recall: Define illusion of explanatory depth. Why is this risky in science?
4. Recall: Define the nomological, pattern-based, and causal accounts of explanation. List one advantage and two problems with each of these three accounts of explanation.
5. Apply: Choose one account of explanation: nomological, pattern, or causal. Find a novel example of a scientific explanation that seems to conform to the account you chose. Describe the example, making clear how it succeeds as an explanation. Then describe why this example should be seen as conforming to the account of explanation you chose.
6. Think: Construct a chart or table listing the strengths and weaknesses of each of the three accounts of explanation discussed in this section. Decide which account(s) of explanation is the most promising, and support your answer with an argument.

#### 12.3 SCIENTIFIC BREAKTHROUGHS AND THEORY CHANGE

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Define and give an example of a scientific breakthrough
- Outline Kuhn’s view of the four stages of science
- Describe how the discovery of oxygen led to changes to the field of chemistry

#### Scientific breakthroughs

We said in section 12.1 that, when a new theory is formed, this sometimes involves a significant conceptual shift or feat of imagination that gives rise to new ways of thinking about observations. No scientific theory is accepted beyond any doubt, and theories are sometimes replaced by successors. The differences between a theory and its successor can be minor, while in other cases there is a radical shift. The most significant scientific breakthroughs, when there has been a radical shift in theory in some field of science, have been changes in worldview: they involve comprehensive revision to how background assumptions, data, and ideas are combined, and thus to which scientific theory is supported.

Consider again theories of our universe and the bodies within it. The worldview that arose with Aristotle had great scope and logical coherence. The Aristotelian theory of falling bodies claims that heavy bodies fall faster than light ones, and its geocentric conception of the universe placed Earth at the center, which fits with most common observations of how the world is. But, over time, observations were made that the Aristotelian worldview couldn’t easily accommodate. Eventually it was replaced by a Copernican, and then Newtonian, conception of the universe, with the Earth not a fixed center, but a planet in motion around the Sun.

Because of the dramatic change in worldview, astronomers from the 4th century BCE and the 17th century would have agreed about the positions of the stars in the sky, but they would have radically different interpretations of those observations. Similar observations provided clues to constructing the theories, but the differences between those theories were vast. This is the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries, discussed also in Chapter 2.

Additional radical shifts followed on the heels of the rejection of the Aristotelean worldview, and with these changes came radical revisions to accepted ideas about the position and movement of Earth, the shape of orbits, and the nature of universal forces. In general, each new theory accounted for some body of evidence better than its predecessor. Still, most of the changes were rather radical changes in perspective. The same is true of the later replacement of Newtonian mechanics with Einstein’s theory of relativity, when universal forces were replaced by non-Euclidean geometries of space-time.

Scientific breakthroughs have occurred in other fields of science as well. This is as you’d expect if scientists are genuinely open to revising or replacing any theory when doing so is warranted by the evidence. And breakthroughs seem rewarding and significant: there’s a sense that, after a scientific breakthrough, we more clearly understand our world. An initial spark of insight leads to a conceptual shift or feat of imagination that results in reinterpreting existing data to support a new theory, and then more data are discovered that confirm this new theory.

From another perspective, though, the idea of scientific breakthroughs is also troubling. What happened to our scientific knowledge from before the breakthrough—were scientists just wrong? How do we know that our current best theories won’t suffer the same fate and also be rejected for new and better theories? Can we trust our current scientific theories at all, then? These are deep and troubling questions that strike right. at the heart of science. But let’s postpone that discussion until later in this chapter, after we have a fuller picture of what scientific breakthroughs are like, and how and why they occur.

#### Kuhn’s scientific revolutions

The series of scientific breakthroughs in the 17th century just described suggests we might think about scientific breakthroughs in terms of revolution. Revolutions are pretty dramatic; think of political revolutions like the French revolution at the end of the 18th century, the fall of the Soviet Union two hundred years later, or the Arab Spring in the early 2010s. A scientific revolution is a radical change of a reigning theory being overturned or abandoned in favor of a new theory, often involving an alternative worldview. Scientific revolutions don’t just change which scientific theories are accepted; they also influence the trajectory of science itself, including how to interpret evidence, which scientific procedures are accepted, and often the social and institutional structure of science, such as who is accepted as a scientific authority.

The sociologist, historian, and philosopher Thomas Kuhn wrote a famous book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, first published in 1962. In this book, Kuhn advanced an influential model of scientific change based on the notion of revolution. He suggested that scientific revolutions have occurred and will continue to occur periodically as an important part of science. In his view, this prevents science from proceeding in a straight line by accumulating an increasing body of knowledge and an expanding store of explanations. Kuhn argued that science instead proceeds in phases.

Kuhn called the earliest phase of science pre-paradigm. This is characterized by the existence of different schools of thought that debate very basic assumptions, including research methods and the nature and significance of data. Data collection is unsystematic, and it’s easy for theories to accommodate new observations because the theories are inchoate, or undeveloped. Such theories can easily be adapted in different ways to accommodate new observations. There are many puzzles and problems but not very many solutions.

Kuhn’s second phase is the normalization of scientific research. One school of thought begins to solve puzzles and problems in ways that seems successful enough to draw adherents away from other approaches. Kuhn called this period normal science, because scientific researchers’ widespread agreement about basic assumptions allows the research to become stable. Scientific practices become organized. Laboratories or other workspaces may be set up, research techniques and methods become widely accepted, and agreed-upon measurement devices are improved.

During normal science, scientific developments are driven by adherence to what Kuhn called a paradigm. Broadly conceived, a paradigm is just a way of practicing science. It supplies scientists with a stock of concepts, symbols, and assumptions about the world that they can use to communicate more effectively. A paradigm also involves methods for gathering and analyzing data, as well as habits of scientific research and reasoning more generally. For example, in 20th-century psychology and psychiatry, the behaviorist overthrow of the introspectionist and psychoanalytic paradigms weren’t just a change in theory; rather, this ushered in new experimental tools, methods of operant conditioning, and ways of thinking about how to perform science. A paradigm stems from elements of the reigning school of thought, a risky conjecture that has been sufficiently confirmed by evidence to be taken on board and developed into a scientific theory.

Kuhn thought that, during a period of normal science, each field of science is governed by a single paradigm. But, scientists in the grip of some paradigm have often ended up with observations that are at odds with it, or that lead to worrying puzzles called anomalies: deviations from expectations that resist explanation by the reigning theory. Usually, anomalies are just noted and set aside for future research. But anomalies can accumulate, and this creates a kind of increasing tension for the accepted scientific theory. Some scientists begin to worry that the theory might not be right after all.

The accumulation of anomalies sets science up for a crisis. A crisis occurs when scientists finally lose confidence in the reigning theory in the face of mounting anomalies. For Kuhn, a paradigm is only rejected if a critical mass of anomalies has led to crisis and there’s also a rival paradigm to replace it. Another theory has been developed by some renegade scientists, and the problems with the existing paradigm mean that this new theory—together with its background assumptions, methods, and so forth—can finally get attention. If this is so, a crisis might be followed by a scientific revolution.

In this phase of science, all the elements of the accepted paradigm are up for negotiation. Data, interpretations of data, background assumptions, methods and technical apparatus, and so on—any and all might be rejected, replaced, or reinterpreted from the perspective of the new paradigm. This four-stage view of scientific change is summarized in Table 12.1.

#### The chemical revolution

The Scientific Revolution began when geocentrism was replaced with heliocentrism in astronomy: the Earth was no longer seen as the central heavenly body but instead taken to revolve around the Sun. According to Kuhn, this perfectly fit his ideal description of Kuhn’s scientific revolution.

**Kuhn’s four stage account of scientific change**

| Stage                       | Features                                                     |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 1. Pre-paradigmatic science | Different schools of thought debate basic assumptions        |
| 2. Normal science           | A paradigm is accepted, and efforts are devoted to basic research and puzzle-solving |
| 3. Crisis                   | Scientists lose confidence in the dominant paradigm upon the accumulation of anomalies |
| 4. Revolution               | The old paradigm is rejected in favor of a new one           |

#### 

Another abrupt revolutionary change in science that Kuhn recognized as a scientific revolution involved sweeping changes in the field of chemistry in the 18th century. Two of the protagonists of this scientific revolution were the chemists Antoine-Laurent and Marie-Anne Paulze Lavoisier. When they began their work, scientific understanding of matter and its transformations was still grounded in the Aristotelian worldview. Aristotle had believed that all earthly materials are composed of the elements air, earth, fire, and water. This theory of the four elements had been slowly modified by the medieval alchemists, who aimed to turn base metals into gold and to produce an elixir of immortality. By the 18th century, alchemists believed all things were compounds of sulfur, mercury, and salt.

In the early 18th century, one pressing scientific question was: what happens when something burns? Alchemists thought that materials lose sulfur when they change into slag, rust, or ash by heating. The physician and chemist Georg Ernst Stahl modified this idea, developing the theory that every combustible material contains a universal fire-like substance, which he named phlogiston (from Greek, meaning flammable). Combustible materials like wood tend to lose weight when burned, and Stahl explained this change in terms of the release of phlogiston from the combustible material to the air. When the air becomes saturated with phlogiston or when a combustible material releases all its phlogiston, the burning stops. Stahl believed that the residual substance left behind after a metal burns is the true substance of the original metal, which lost its phlogiston during combustion. This residue, which was called “metal calx” (what we would now call an oxide), has the form of a fine powder. Both metal calx and the gases produced during combustion could be captured, measured, and experimentally manipulated.

Unlike gases and calx, though, phlogiston was an utter mystery. Nobody had isolated it, and nobody had found a way to manipulate it experimentally. In fact, phlogiston seemed to have properties that were inconsistent with Stahl’s theory. Stahl believed phlogiston had a positive weight. When you burn a piece of wood, the remaining ash loses phlogiston, and it weighs less than the original log. But in other cases, for example, when magnesium or phosphorus burn, the residue left behind weighs more than the original material. If phlogiston is released during the burning process, why was there a gain in weight in these cases?

Intrigued by this anomaly, the Lavoisiers experimented with various metals and gases to investigate why and how things burn. They observed that lead calx releases air when it is heated. This suggested that combustion and air were, somehow, linked. Explaining the link was a difficult task, however, because at that time little was known about the composition and chemistry of air. Meeting Joseph Priestley helped. Priestley had discovered a gas he called “dephlogisticated air,” which was released by heated mercury calx. This gas was thought to greatly facilitate combustion because, being free from phlogiston, it could absorb a greater amount of the phlogiston released by burning materials. Candles burning in a container with “dephlogisticated air” would burn for much longer, for example. This gas, Priestley observed, facilitated respiration too: mice in containers with dephlogisticated air lived longer than mice placed in containers without this gas.

The Lavoisiers tried to replicate Priestley’s experiments; and, based on their own results and observations, they elaborated a new theory of combustion. The central idea was that combustion was the reaction of a metal or other material with the “eminently respirable” part of air. Believing (incorrectly) that this kind of air was necessary to form all sour‐tasting substances, or acids, Lavoisier called it oxygène, from the Greek words for acid generator. According to this new theory, combustion did not involve the removal of phlogiston from the burning material but, rather, the addition of oxygen.

This emerging rival paradigm set the basis for the revolution from which modern chemistry emerged. In the 1780s, the Lavoisiers and other scientists adopted the idea of a chemical element, and of chemical compositions of simpler elements. This new system of chemistry was set out by Antoine‐Laurent Lavoisier in a textbook in 1789. This book didn’t just describe the theory, but also explained the effects of heat on chemical reactions, the nature of gases, and how acids and bases react to form salts. It also described the technological instruments used to perform chemical experiments. And it contains a “Table of Simple Substances”—the first modern listing of chemical elements.

After the publication of this textbook, most young chemists adopted Lavoisier’s theory and abandoned phlogiston. “All young chemists,” he wrote in 1791, “adopt the theory, and from that I conclude that the revolution in chemistry has come to pass.” From a Kuhnian perspective, the next phase of normal science had begun.

##### EXERCISES

12.13 Recall: Define scientific breakthrough and give an example.

12.14 Think: How are scientific breakthroughs valuable for scientific knowledge? How are they challenging for scientific knowledge?

12.15 Recall: Describe the features of each of Kuhn’s four stages of science: pre-paradigm science, normal science, crisis, and scientific revolution. Illustrate each stage by describing how it applies to the chemical revolution.

12.16 Recall: The case of phlogiston presented an anomaly for Stahl’s theory. How so? Describe the extensive changes that the discovery of oxygen led to for the field of chemistry.

12.17 Apply: The advent and rapid development of computers was a major technological advance. Given your background knowledge, would you describe the development of computers as a Kuhnian revolution? Why or why not?

### 12.4 SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS AND THE SECURITY OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- Give two examples of incremental theory change in science and describe their differences from Kuhnian paradigm shifts
- Identify two challenges for scientific knowledge from scientific breakthroughs and at least one response to each challenge
- Describe three reasons to think scientific knowledge is safe, regardless of the possibility of radical theory change

#### Incremental theory change

Kuhn’s notion of scientific revolution seems to accurately characterize some episodes in the history of science—the times of especially radical transformation in accepted scientific knowledge. But, this is a particularly extreme form of scientific change. Most other episodes of scientific change seem to be less dramatic, and there’s also a question about whether ordinary scientific activity fits Kuhn’s characterization of normal science.

Incremental changes in science are more common and less abrupt than Kuhn’s account suggests. Consider, for example, the Darwinian revolution in the 19th century. Darwin’s theory of evolution has had a dramatic and lasting impact on our understanding of the nature of lifeforms, the relationships among different species, and how species have changed over time, and—like the change from geocentrism to heliocentrism—the establishment of Darwinian theory was arguably a scientific revolution if anything is. But Darwin did not produce the first evolutionary theory, nor has evolutionary theory remained entirely the same as what Darwin first described. Changes in the field of biology, both before and after Darwin’s revolutionary breakthrough, have been more gradual than a Kuhnian paradigm shift.

The general idea of evolution is that whole species—not just individuals—can change over time, and this idea is many centuries old. The nature of biological change as a scientific research program can be traced to the work of several naturalists over 50 years before the publication of Darwin’s *Origin of Species* in 1859. Even Darwin’s specific ideas about evolution were significantly influenced by other scientific work; we’ve already mentioned the influence of the political economist Thomas Richard Malthus. And another scientist working at the same time as Darwin, Alfred Russel Wallace, was independently developing a theory of evolution by natural selection strikingly similar to Darwin’s. So, although Darwin’s ideas were a tremendous breakthrough, they built upon existing scientific work, and they were inspired by and related to concurrent scientific work by others.

Furthermore, the science of biology since the Darwinian revolution has not simply consisted in the application of Darwin’s ideas, as Kuhn would have us expect for a period of normal science. Rather, our understanding of evolution has been in continual development. The so-called modern synthesis in the early 20th century integrated the existing knowledge of genetics and Darwinian evolutionary theory, which had previously been construed as competing theories. Other elements of evolutionary theory have been revised since, like the recognition of nongenetic influences on traits and how significantly organisms shape their environment.

Another point in support of incremental rather than revolutionary scientific change is that theory change doesn’t always involve the rejection of existing theories. Sometimes it comes from the joining of theories, as in the modern synthesis just mentioned, and other times it can come from new methods. Biologist James Watson and physicist Francis Crick, for example, reached their groundbreaking conclusion that the DNA molecule exists in the form of a double helix by applying a new modeling approach to data gathered by Rosalind Franklin. Using cardboard cutouts to represent the chemical components of DNA, Watson and Crick tried to make different arrangements, as though they were solving a jigsaw puzzle. Through this concrete model-building, the double helix structure of DNA was identified. This had enormous consequences for subsequent biological research.

Nonscientific pursuits, such as mathematics and philosophy, can drive scientific theory change too. The development of a new kind of geometry—non-Euclidean Riemannian geometry—paved the way for Einstein’s theory of relativity. Einstein’s theory adopted this purely mathematical geometry as a description of physical space-time. One basic difference between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry concerns the nature of parallel lines. In Euclidean geometry, there’s only one line through a given point that is parallel to another line. In some non-Euclidean geometries, there are infinitely many lines through a point that are parallel to another line and, in others, there are no parallel lines. This development in mathematics made it possible for Einstein to wonder whether the geometry of our own universe might be non-Euclidean. Around this same time, the development of new logical systems of predication, quantification, and operators helped move far beyond the syllogistic logic that had dominated for the past two millennia. These developments in turn affected, and were affected by, these upheavals in mathematics and led to the generation of set theory, mathematical logic, and computer science.

 In summary, scientific theories undoubtedly change. But these changes may be influenced by changes in method, data, mathematics, or other relevant ideas or practices. And the changes tend to be incremental and cumulative more often than radical and transformative.

##### Box 12.3 Merton’s priority rule

According to sociologist of science Robert Merton, the first scientist making a novel discovery is rewarded with prestige and recognition. The second discoverers, runners-up, get nothing. Priority in discovery matters for patents and copyrights in applied science. It also matters more generally for recognition and prestige, which are the common currencies of scientific credit. Prestige in science comes in different forms. It can include promotion, prizes like the Fields Medal or Nobel Prize, and eponymy—that is, having a discovery named after oneself, like Parkinson’s disease. If the first scientist to publish a new discovery receives recognition and the seconds get nothing, then priority is a strong motivator for scientists, which then shapes the reward structure of their field. Scientists often worry about their work being scooped, and priority disputes occur regularly in science. Famous cases include Isaac Newton versus Gottfried Leibniz over the invention of calculus, Charles Darwin versus Alfred Wallace over the discovery of natural selection and evolution, and more recently, researchers at MIT versus UC Berkeley over the discovery of CRISPR-Cas9, a very significant genome-editing technology.

#### Scientific progress

Earlier, we raised worries about how scientific breakthroughs may undermine our confidence in scientific theories. If some theories that were seemingly well supported by evidence are eventually rejected, who’s to say our current theories won’t also be rejected? And do such scientific breakthroughs make it so that science isn’t really making progress at all? Let’s consider these questions in a bit more depth and isolate a few important considerations.

When scientific theories change, do we have reason to think that the new theory is an improvement on the last one and that science is progressing towards truth? This question is complicated by two features of theories and theory change. First, theories often appeal to phenomena that cannot be directly observed. Examples of this we have encountered in this book include the Higgs boson, the first moments of the universe’s existence after the Big Bang, and the original common ancestor of all life on Earth. 

How can we ever be sure we are right about these and other phenomena like them? Second, at least some instances of theory change have been radical: scientists eventually rejected phlogiston, decided they were wrong about the placement of Earth in the universe, and learned that psychiatric conditions such as depression are not imbalances of bodily humors. How can we ever be sure that our scientific findings are on a path to truth, when the next radical revision could be right around the corner?

There’s at least one influential argument suggesting that, despite all this, we have reason to believe that our best mature scientific theories are approximately true. This argument is an abductive inference, or inference to the best explanation, from the success of science. It begins with the observation that our best scientific theories are extraordinarily successful: they enable scientists to make empirical predictions, to explain phenomena, to design and build powerful technologies. What could explain this success? One possible explanation is that our best scientific theories are approximately true. If these theories were not approximately true, then the fact that they are so successful would be astonishing. So, it seems, the best explanation for the success of science is that our best theories are true—or, at least on the path to true and getting closer. This is sometimes called the no miracles argument, suggesting that all of the scientific successes we know about would be utterly mysterious—that is, would have no explanation—unless scientific theories are approximately true.

Yet, some believe that this conclusion is overly optimistic. Here’s an inductive argument for the opposite conclusion. If we examine the history of scientific theories in any given field, we find plenty examples of older and successful theories rejected in favor of newer, more successful theories. So, most past theories, which were also predictively successful and empirically adequate, turned out to be false. Therefore, by generalizing from these cases, our current scientific theories are likely to be false as well, standing a good chance of eventually being replaced themselves by new theories. This is sometimes called the pessimistic meta-induction, since it draws a pessimistic conclusion about the eventual fate of today’s scientific theories based on inductive reasoning from the rejection of many past scientific theories. The upshot of this argument is that we do not have a strong reason to think our current best scientific theories are approximately true.

#### Why scientific knowledge is safe

The pessimistic meta-induction raises important questions about how certain we can be about our current scientific theories. What it doesn’t do is undermine the fact that science is the single most successful project of generating knowledge that humans have ever embarked on. There are reasons to think scientific knowledge is trustworthy and safe, even if we can’t be certain that our current scientific theories are the final say on how the world is.

First, consider the point we made earlier about incremental theory change. Some theoretical breakthroughs may resemble Kuhnian paradigm shifts, but many more developments in scientific theory are small and incremental, suggesting that previous successes may persist—and be further built upon—as scientific theories advance. This seems so for the development of both psychiatry theories of depression and evolutionary theory. And, even when new research has shown limitations in earlier theories, often the abilities and insights based on those theories persist. Sometimes, it’s even the case that scientists return to earlier, rejected theories for inspiration when current theoretical frameworks come up short. For example, recall from Chapter 2 how limitations of the germ theory of disease inspired a restored focus in public health to social determinates of disease.

Second, scientific theories are only one part of the overall scientific endeavor. Even if some of the theoretical claims at the heart of a scientific theory are eventually shown to be wrong or only approximately true, that can leave intact the value of many ideas, observations, and technological advances associated with the theory. Those ideas, observations, and advances qualify as factors in the production of scientific knowledge in their own right. For example, although phlogiston is no longer posited as a chemical created from combustion, the observable features of combustion that motivated phlogiston theory, such as the residues produced and their volumes, are still counted as part of our body of knowledge of combustion.

Third, scientific knowledge is safe despite the possibility of future breakthroughs because science is not just a collection of theories. At its heart, science is a collection of methods, a set of recipes for investigating our world featuring common ingredients—most prominently, hypotheses, expectations, and observations. Parts of these recipes, like empirical observation and attempts to explain, are common to people of all ages all around the world. Other parts, like experimentation and mathematical tools, have developed in several cultures at different times. And some aspects, like a social institution balancing trust and skepticism, developed with contemporary institutionalized science. This set of recipes for science has persisted and been improved through continual refinement for centuries. It will continue to evolve, but it is unlikely ever to be supplanted, even if individual scientific theories are sometimes abandoned. Over the long arc of history societies have much to gain, and little to lose, by relying on the best science of their day.

##### EXERCISES

12.18 Recall: Describe why Darwinian evolutionary theory is better seen as incremental theory change. How does this instance of theory change differ from Kuhnian paradigm shifts? Watch Video 16

12.19 Recall: Define the no miracles argument and the pessimistic meta-induction. Explicitly state the conclusion of each argument.

12.20 Think: Consider again the no miracles argument and the pessimistic meta-induction. Assess each argument, one at a time, writing at least one paragraph evaluating each. Then, for each, say whether you are ultimately convinced of its conclusion.

12.21 Think: How does the existence of scientific breakthroughs, or revolutions, challenge the ideas of scientific truth and scientific progress? Motivate the concern.

12.22 Recall: Describe three reasons to think scientific knowledge is safe, regardless of the possibility of radical theory change.

12.23 Think: How convinced are you by these three reasons to think scientific knowledge is safe? Why? Can you think of additional grounds for trusting scientific knowledge? What lingering concerns, if any, do you still have about science’s trustworthiness?

##### FURTHER READINGS

For more on depression and psychiatry, see these volumes in Oxford’s very short introduction series:

- Scott, J., & Tacchi, M. J. (2017). *Depression*. Oxford University Press.
- Burns, T. (2018). *Psychiatry*. Oxford University Press.

For an introduction to scientific explanation, see McCain, K. (2022). *Understanding how science explains the world*. Cambridge University Press.

For Kuhn’s view of scientific revolutions, see Kuhn, T. (1962). *The structure of scientific revolutions*. University of Chicago Press.

For more on scientific realism, see Anjan Chakravartty’s “Scientific realism.” In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), *The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy* (Summer 2017 ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/entries/scientific-realism/.